OCTOBER WE
EVERYONE&apos;S READY.
OK, GREAT, SO HELLO, WELCOME TO
THE SEPTEMBER TWENTY FIRST
ELECTRONIC MEETING OF THE ANN
ARBOR TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
.
THIS MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY TO PROTECT
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY WILL
CONDUCT THIS MEETING SIMILARLY
TO AN IN-PERSON MEETING PUBLIC
COMMENT WILL BE VIA TELEPHONE
OR ZOOME TO SPEAK DURING ANY
OF THE PUBLIC COMMENT
OPPORTUNITIES PLEASE CALL TWO
ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN NINE
SEVEN TWO THREE AND ENTER
MEETING ID NINE SIX ZERO TWO
TWO THREE TWO EIGHT TWO ZERO
ZERO OR JOINED BY OTHER ZOOM
LINK.
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE ON THE PUBLIC AGENDA
AND IN SEVERAL PLACES ON THE
WEBSITE.
I&apos;LL NOW ASK RAYMOND TO CALL
THE ROLE.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
I WILL NOW CALL ROLL.
I HAVE RECEIVED REGRET&apos;S FROM
COMMISSIONER MARGOLIS AND
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGGS THAT THEY
WILL NOT BE ABLE TO ATTEND OR
POSSIBLY BE LATE AND AS A
REMINDER PLEASE STAY HERE WHEN
I CALL YOUR NAME AND WHERE YOU
ARE DIALING IN FROM WHEN YOUR
NAME IS CALLED COMMISSIONER
BOLAND HERE ZOOMING IN FROM ANN
ARBOR FROM ANN ARBOR COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGG&apos;S WE SAID WAS
ABSENT COMMISSIONER ROVEN HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER HOW
TO MACCHI THERE FROM ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER HERE FROM ANN
ARBOR.
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER KEELER HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR.
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER LINMAN, YOU&apos;RE
COMMISSIONER YANG SORRY TO HEAR
FROM ANN ARBOR.
FROM OUR COMMISSIONER LEIGH
COMMISSIONER YANG SORRY TO HEAR
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR.
FROM OUR COMMISSIONER LEIGH
COMMISSIONER, ONE INCOME HERE
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR.
FROM ANN ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER, ONE INCOME HERE
COMMISSIONER HESS HERE FROM ANN
FROM ANN ARBOR.
ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER HESS HERE FROM ANN
MISSIONER HUTCHINSON HERE.
ARBOR.
MANARA COMMISSIONER MARGOLIS
MISSIONER HUTCHINSON HERE.
ABSENT AS WE DISCUSSED
MANARA COMMISSIONER MARGOLIS
LIEUTENANT MIKE SCHERBA LOOKS
ABSENT AS WE DISCUSSED
LIKE HE MIGHT BE ABSENT.
LIEUTENANT MIKE SCHERBA LOOKS
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;RE RUNNING LATE AND
LIKE HE MIGHT BE ABSENT.
COMMISSIONER STUKA ABSENT.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;RE RUNNING LATE AND
WE DO HAVE QUORUM AND THEN
COMMISSIONER STUKA ABSENT.
ACTUALLY IF I MAY CHAIR I&apos;D
WE DO HAVE QUORUM AND THEN
LIKE TO TAKE JUST A MOMENT TO
ACTUALLY IF I MAY CHAIR I&apos;D
INTRODUCE YOU TO CHRIS SUSPENSE
LIKE TO TAKE JUST A MOMENT TO
.
INTRODUCE YOU TO CHRIS SUSPENSE
HE IS OUR NEW MANAGEMENT
.
ASSISTANT AND CHRIS IS GOING TO
HE IS OUR NEW MANAGEMENT
BE INCREASINGLY ASSISTING WITH
ASSISTANT AND CHRIS IS GOING TO
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
BE INCREASINGLY ASSISTING WITH
MATTERS.
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
SO YOU&apos;RE GOING TO START SEEING
MATTERS.
SOME COMMUNICATIONS FROM HIM AS
SO YOU&apos;RE GOING TO START SEEING
WELL AS HE&apos;S GOING TO HELP RUN
SOME COMMUNICATIONS FROM HIM AS
THE MEETING.
WELL AS HE&apos;S GOING TO HELP RUN
SO HE&apos;S GOING TO HELP WITH SOME
THE MEETING.
OF THE ZOOME CONTROLS AND ALSO
SO HE&apos;S GOING TO HELP WITH SOME
HELP TAKE NOTES.
OF THE ZOOME CONTROLS AND ALSO
SO HE&apos;S A BREATH OF FRESH AIR
HELP TAKE NOTES.
RELIEF FOR ME.
SO HE&apos;S A BREATH OF FRESH AIR
HOPEFULLY I&apos;LL HAVE MY ACT
RELIEF FOR ME.
TOGETHER A LITTLE BIT MORE WITH
HOPEFULLY I&apos;LL HAVE MY ACT
HIS ASSISTANTS.
TOGETHER A LITTLE BIT MORE WITH
SO I THANK YOU FOR YOUR
HIS ASSISTANTS.
PATIENCE OVER THESE MONTHS AS
SO I THANK YOU FOR YOUR
I&apos;VE KIND OF MUDDLED THROUGH
PATIENCE OVER THESE MONTHS AS
THESE MEETINGS BUT I APPRECIATE
I&apos;VE KIND OF MUDDLED THROUGH
YOUR UNDERSTANDING AND PATIENCE
THESE MEETINGS BUT I APPRECIATE
AND SO YEAH.
YOUR UNDERSTANDING AND PATIENCE
SO YOU&apos;LL BE SEEING MORE
AND SO YEAH.
OF CHRIS MOVING FORWARD SO
SO YOU&apos;LL BE SEEING MORE
GREAT.
OF CHRIS MOVING FORWARD SO
&gt;&gt; THANKS SO MUCH AND WELCOME
GREAT.
CHRIS.
&gt;&gt; THANKS SO MUCH AND WELCOME
SO NEXT UP WE&apos;RE GOING TO DO
CHRIS.
THE APPROVAL OF THE CONSENT
SO NEXT UP WE&apos;RE GOING TO DO
AGENDA.
THE APPROVAL OF THE CONSENT
THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON THE
AGENDA.
CONSENT AGENDA APPROVAL OF THE
THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON THE
AGENDA AND APPROVAL OF LAST
CONSENT AGENDA APPROVAL OF THE
MONTH&apos;S MINUTES.
AGENDA AND APPROVAL OF LAST
&gt;&gt; ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS
MONTH&apos;S MINUTES.
TO THE CONSENT AGENDA?
&gt;&gt; ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS
OK.
TO THE CONSENT AGENDA?
IS THERE A MOTION TO APPROVE
OK.
THE CONSENT AGENDA AS
IS THERE A MOTION TO APPROVE
PRESENTED?
THE CONSENT AGENDA AS
I SEE COMMISSIONER AND SECONDED
PRESENTED?
BY PROVAN OK, ALL THOSE IN
I SEE COMMISSIONER AND SECONDED
FAVOR OF THE MOTION PLEASE
BY PROVAN OK, ALL THOSE IN
PHYSICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND IF
FAVOR OF THE MOTION PLEASE
YOU&apos;RE ON CAMERA OR SAY YES YES
PHYSICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND IF
.
YOU&apos;RE ON CAMERA OR SAY YES YES
ALL THOSE OPPOSED ALL RIGHT.
.
AGENDA OR CONSENT AGENDA PASSES
ALL THOSE OPPOSED ALL RIGHT.
.
AGENDA OR CONSENT AGENDA PASSES
NEXT UP IS PUBLIC COMMENT.
.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
NEXT UP IS PUBLIC COMMENT.
PEOPLE TO SPEAK FOR UP TO THREE
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
MINUTES.
PEOPLE TO SPEAK FOR UP TO THREE
PLEASE CALL TO ZERO SIX THREE
MINUTES.
THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO
PLEASE CALL TO ZERO SIX THREE
THREE AND ENTER MEETING NUMBER
THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO
NINE SIX ZERO TWO TWO THREE TWO
THREE AND ENTER MEETING NUMBER
EIGHT TWO ZERO ZERO OR CONNECT
NINE SIX ZERO TWO TWO THREE TWO
I ASSUME AS DESCRIBED ON THE
EIGHT TWO ZERO ZERO OR CONNECT
AGENDA, CITY STAFF WILL SELECT
I ASSUME AS DESCRIBED ON THE
CALLERS THAT HAVE RAISED THEIR
AGENDA, CITY STAFF WILL SELECT
HAND USING THE LAST THREE
CALLERS THAT HAVE RAISED THEIR
DIGITS OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR
HAND USING THE LAST THREE
YOUR ZOOM ID IN ORDER TO RAISE
DIGITS OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR
YOUR HAND TO INDICATE YOUR
YOUR ZOOM ID IN ORDER TO RAISE
DESIRE TO SPEAK PLEASE PRESS
YOUR HAND TO INDICATE YOUR
STAR NINE ON YOUR PHONE OR
DESIRE TO SPEAK PLEASE PRESS
SELECT THE RAISE HAND BUTTON IN
STAR NINE ON YOUR PHONE OR
ZOOM YOU&apos;LL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
SELECT THE RAISE HAND BUTTON IN
ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE HOST IS
ZOOM YOU&apos;LL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK AND SINCE
ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE HOST IS
WE HAVE ANOTHER PERSON HELPING
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK AND SINCE
I WANT TO CLARIFY WHO IS TIMING
WE HAVE ANOTHER PERSON HELPING
THE THREE MINUTES YOU&apos;RE GOING
I WANT TO CLARIFY WHO IS TIMING
TO OK, GREAT.
THE THREE MINUTES YOU&apos;RE GOING
DO WE HAVE ANY PUBLIC COMMENTS
TO OK, GREAT.
TONIGHT?
DO WE HAVE ANY PUBLIC COMMENTS
&gt;&gt; WE DO INDEED.
TONIGHT?
MR. CLARK GENACHOWSKI IS ON THE
&gt;&gt; WE DO INDEED.
LINE AND I DO WANT TO QUICKLY
MR. CLARK GENACHOWSKI IS ON THE
CLARIFY SOMETHING LIEUTENANT
LINE AND I DO WANT TO QUICKLY
SCHERBA WAS IN THE MEETING.
CLARIFY SOMETHING LIEUTENANT
HE WAS AN ATTENDEE SO I JUST
SCHERBA WAS IN THE MEETING.
PROMOTED HIM TO PANELIST.
HE WAS AN ATTENDEE SO I JUST
SO MY APOLOGIES, LIEUTENANT.
PROMOTED HIM TO PANELIST.
SURE.
SO MY APOLOGIES, LIEUTENANT.
BUT THESE ARE THE SORT
SURE.
OF THINGS THAT CHRIS IS GOING
BUT THESE ARE THE SORT
TO GET SO THAT WON&apos;T HAPPEN IF
OF THINGS THAT CHRIS IS GOING
I DON&apos;T KNOW WHERE HE&apos;S COMING
TO GET SO THAT WON&apos;T HAPPEN IF
COMING FROM A TOWNSHIP TODAY.
I DON&apos;T KNOW WHERE HE&apos;S COMING
THANK YOU, SIR.
COMING FROM A TOWNSHIP TODAY.
ALL RIGHT, MR CZARNECKI, I HAVE
THANK YOU, SIR.
ALLOWED YOU TO SPEAK GO AHEAD
ALL RIGHT, MR CZARNECKI, I HAVE
AND SHOOT YOURSELF IN THE
ALLOWED YOU TO SPEAK GO AHEAD
FLOOR.
AND SHOOT YOURSELF IN THE
&gt;&gt; IS YOURS BY THE MINERVA AND
FLOOR.
A COUPLE OF THINGS.
&gt;&gt; IS YOURS BY THE MINERVA AND
ONE IS FOR THE NEW PATHWAY
A COUPLE OF THINGS.
ALONG WITH THE ROAD IS
ONE IS FOR THE NEW PATHWAY
COMPLETED A LITTLE BIT
ALONG WITH THE ROAD IS
OF LANDSCAPING TO DO YET BUT
COMPLETED A LITTLE BIT
ALREADY CHILDREN VISIT TO THE
OF LANDSCAPING TO DO YET BUT
LOCAL SCHOOL OF THE WORKING ON
ALREADY CHILDREN VISIT TO THE
THE ROAD.
LOCAL SCHOOL OF THE WORKING ON
SO GLAD TO SEE THAT HAPPENING.
THE ROAD.
ALSO I&apos;D LIKE WHAT YOU DID THE
SO GLAD TO SEE THAT HAPPENING.
ONE MOTORIZED RAILROAD THAT
ALSO I&apos;D LIKE WHAT YOU DID THE
TUNNELS THAT ARE PROPOSED PLUS
ONE MOTORIZED RAILROAD THAT
OTHER CROSSINGS WHICH ARE LEFT
TUNNELS THAT ARE PROPOSED PLUS
UNDEFINED FINE BUT IMAGINE ONE
OTHER CROSSINGS WHICH ARE LEFT
OF THOSE WITH ONE
DOWN HERE AND
I JUST HAVE ONE QUESTION FOR
YOU HAD THE TONIGHT&apos;S MEETING
SOME MODIFICATION OR PART
OF PROGRAM?
I JUST WANT TO VERIFY THAT THE
INTERPRETATION REPLACEMENT IS
STILL IN THE CAPITAL PROGRAM ON
THE SUBJECT IS CORRECT AND
BECAUSE I HAD TO MAKE THANK YOU
AND I THINK WE CAN WE CAN I
KNOW WE DON&apos;T OFTEN ANSWER
QUESTIONS BUT WE CAN CLARIFY
THAT MY UNDERSTANDING IS THAT
IT&apos;S STILL IN THE THE LARGER
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.
WHAT WE&apos;RE LOOKING AT TONIGHT
IS JUST RECOMMENDATIONS FROM
THE COMMISSION ABOUT THINGS
THAT WE THINK SHOULD SHOULD BE
IN THERE THAT ARE NOT OR THAT
ARE IN THERE THAT SHOULD BE
PRIORITIZED HIGHLY.
SO I THINK THAT SO IT&apos;S STILL
IT&apos;S STILL IN THERE.
IT&apos;S JUST I THINK IT&apos;S NOT IN
THE DOCUMENT THAT WE TALK ABOUT
TONIGHT IS THAT RIGHT, RAYMOND?
YEAH, OK.
THANKS SO MUCH FOR THE ONE ONE
LITTLE CLARIFICATION BEYOND
THAT MOLLY, IS THAT WE ARE JUST
TAKING OFF THE IP DEVELOPMENT
PROCESS SO IT IS AN EXISTING
SIPI THE THE THE NEXT STEP IS
NOT YET DEVELOPED SO I CAN&apos;T
ATTEST TO WHAT IS OR IS NOT
INCLUDED YET BECAUSE WE&apos;RE JUST
IN THE PROCESS OF DEVELOPING
THAT NOW.
SO YEAH BUT MY UNDERSTANDING IS
THERE&apos;S STILL INTEREST IN
KEEPING IT SO REAL.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU AND THANK YOU MR.
SCHNITTKE.
ARE THERE ANY OTHER COUPLE
OF COMMENTERS TONIGHT?
NO MOLLY I DON&apos;T SEE ANY OTHER
ATTENDEES WITH THEIR HAND
RAISED.
OK, SO WE WILL MOVE ON TO OUR
FIRST ORDER OF BUSINESS WHICH
IS THE ORDINANCE AND BYLAWS
AMENDMENT.
SO WE&apos;VE TALKED ABOUT THIS
BEFORE.
I WANTED TO I SUGGESTED THAT WE
CHANGE OUR MEMBERSHIP TO REMOVE
THE SEAT ON THE COMMISSION THAT
IS RESERVED FOR AN OWNER OR
OPERATOR OF A TRANSPORTATION
BUSINESS OPERATING IN ANN ARBOR
AND REPLACE IT WITH ANOTHER
MEMBER LIKE A SEAT FOR A MEMBER
OF THE PUBLIC.
IT&apos;LL ALLOW US TO CAST A LARGER
NET TO MAKE SURE WE HAVE A
COMMISSION THAT&apos;S OPERATING AT
FULL STRENGTH.
THIS WILL BE THE SECOND TIME
THAT WE&apos;VE TALKED ABOUT THIS SO
WE CAN TAKE ACTION TONIGHT AND
ACTUALLY VOTE VOTE ON WHETHER
OR NOT WE WANT TO MAKE THIS
CHANGE AND THEN IT WOULD GET
FORWARDED TO CITY COUNCIL AND
IT&apos;S NOT I THINK UNTIL CITY
COUNCIL APPROVES A CHANGE THAT
WE WOULD ACTUALLY BE ABLE TO
OPEN THAT SEAT UP TO ANOTHER
MEMBER OF THE PUBLIC AS ANY
COMMENTS QUESTIONS?
YES.
FOREST THANKS MADAM.
MADAM CHAIR, I JUST HAVE A
QUICK QUESTION SINCE I SO I CAN
PLAY THAT CARD.
SO ONE OWNER OPERATOR OF A
TRANSPORTATION BUSINESS WOULD
YOU KNOW THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN BE CONCERNED THAT
BECAUSE THEY RUN A PUBLIC
TRANSIT SYSTEM?
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN ALREADY
HAS A SEAT ON THE COMMISSION
YOU SORT OF SEE SO THEY THERE
ARE NON-VOTING MEMBER SO
THEY&apos;RE LIKE A LIAISON SEAT AT
THE COMMISSION.
BUT YEAH, UNIVERSITY MICHIGAN&apos;S
ALREADY ON.
THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER COMMENTS OR QUESTIONS
?
ALL RIGHT.
SO SINCE WE ALREADY TALKED
ABOUT THIS BEFORE, I THINK WE
CAN JUST MOVE STRAIGHT TO A
VOTE.
SO DO I HAVE A MOTION TO
RECOMMEND APPROVAL OF CHANGES
TO BOTH THE SO WE HAVE TO
CHANGE TWO THINGS THE ENABLING
OR ORDINANCE, THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION AND
OUR BYLAWS TO REMOVE QUOTE AN
OWNER OR OPERATOR OF A
TRANSPORTATION BUSINESS
OPERATING IN ANN ARBOR AND TO
REPLACE THE SEAT WITH A QUOTE
MEMBER OF THE PUBLIC.
I SAW JULIE FIRST MOVE TO OH
THANKS LARRY.
I WILL TELL YOU YOU CAN SECOND
SO SECONDED BY LARRY.
GREAT.
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR OF THE
MOTION PLEASE PHYSICALLY RAISE
YOUR HAND IF YOU ARE ON CAMERA
OR SAY YES IF YOU ARE ON AUDIO
YES.
ALL THOSE OPPOSED.
ALL RIGHT.
MOTION PASSES SO WE&apos;RE GOING TO
FOR THE CITY COUNCIL AND
HOPEFULLY WE CAN GET ANOTHER
PERSON ONTO THE COMMISSION
SOON.
&gt;&gt; THANKS EVERYONE.
NEXT UP IS A CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLAN UPDATE.
SO SINCE OUR LAST MEETING PETE
,I WORKED WITH STAFF TO REFINE
AND REORGANIZE THE DRAFT
RECOMMENDATION THAT WE MAKE
THAT WE WANT TO PUT FORWARD
RELATED TO THE THE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLAN THE CITY SOME
OF OUR RECOMMENDATIONS ARE
DIRECTED DIRECTLY AT THE ZIPPI.
OTHERS ARE FOCUSED PROCESS,
BUDGET AND POLICY.
WE DECIDED TO SORT OF KEEP THEM
ALL IN THERE BECAUSE THEY ALL
FELT RELEVANT TO THE CITY IN
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER.
SO I JUST WANTED TO OPEN IT UP
FOR QUESTIONS COMMENTS.
PETE, I DON&apos;T KNOW IF YOU
WANTED TO SAY ANY MORE ABOUT
WHAT&apos;S IN THERE NOW HOW IT ALL
CAME TOGETHER.
&gt;&gt; NO, I THINK YOU COVERED IT
SO ANY QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS,
NICK?
I WAS JUST I WAS JUST READING
THROUGH THIS AND I HAD A
QUESTION ON ONE OF THE ITEMS
UNDER CAPITAL PLAN A CAPITAL
PLAN PROJECTS THE BEGINNING.
IT MENTIONS A IS IT STATE
STREET TO BROADWAY AND
CONNECTING UNDER THE RAILROAD
TO INDUSTRIAL IS THAT SUPPOSED
TO BE BOARDWALK?
&gt;&gt; WE HAD ISSUES WITH THIS.
I DO ALL THE TIME TO TELL THE
TRUTH.
YEAH.
I WAS JUST READING THROUGH IT
AND TRYING TO GET A FEEL FOR
WHERE THE STUFF WAS AND I
BRIEFLY THOUGHT YOU WERE
TALKING ABOUT THE NORTH END
OF STATE STREET CLOSE TO
BROADWAY.
&gt;&gt; SO NOW THAT IT&apos;S SAYS
BROADWAY IT&apos;S I THINK IT&apos;S
SUPPOSED TO SAY BOARDWALK
BECAUSE DOWNSTATE TO BROADWAY
AND CONNECTING WITH THE
RAILROAD INDUSTRY, THEN WE NEED
TO I THINK WE NEED TO MAKE THAT
MODIFICATION TO BOARDWALK.
I THINK I YES.
I ALWAYS DO BUT I DON&apos;T I MEAN
I HEAR I HEAR YOU I&apos;M RIGHT
THERE WITH YOU.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M GLAD I&apos;M NOT THE ONLY
WITNESS THAT THANK YOU FOR
CATCHING THAT.
&gt;&gt; ANY OTHER QUESTIONS OR
COMMENTS
?
ALL RIGHT.
OH, LOOK, I JUST WANTED TO
POINT OUT I APPRECIATE AND LIKE
THE FACT THAT IT DOESN&apos;T JUST
COVER INDIVIDUAL PROJECTS BUT
IT ALSO ADDRESSES THE
EVALUATION AND SELECTION
PROCESS WHICH I THINK IS GOING
TO BE REALLY USEFUL IN FUTURE
YEARS TO DEVELOP TO MAYBE
MODIFY THE PRIORITIES THE MODEL
THAT PRIORITIZES MORE BIKE LANE
GAPS AND CONNECTIVITY AND ALSO
MENTIONS THE SPEED MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM SO HOPEFULLY THIS IS A
APPROPRIATE AVENUE TO MODIFY
THE PROCESS GOING FORWARD AND
THAT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT THAT&apos;S
ALLOWED BY THIS AND BECAUSE IN
ADDITION TO JUST WE WANT WE
LIKE THESE INDIVIDUAL PROJECTS
,I THINK IT&apos;S A GOOD THING
HOPEFULLY THAT CAN HAVE AN
EFFECT GOING FORWARD.
YEAH, IT&apos;S YOU KNOW, THERE&apos;S
NOT ANOTHER CLEAR POINT FOR US
TO TRY AND INFLUENCE THE
PROCESS SO SORT OF PUTTING IT
ALL TOGETHER.
THIS DOCUMENT SEEMED
APPROPRIATE AND KAYLA WHO
MANAGES THE SKYPE THOUGHT THAT
THAT WAS REASONABLE AND SHE
HELPED US JUST REALLY GET IT
ORGANIZED SO THAT IT WAS CLEAR
WHEN WE WERE TALKING ABOUT
PROJECTS VERSUS PROCESSES
.
ALL RIGHT.
SO WE&apos;RE JUST MOVING RIGHT
ALONG.
DO I HAVE A MOTION TO RECOMMEND
APPROVAL OF THE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLAN POSITION
STATEMENT AS REVISED SO THAT
IT&apos;S TALKING ABOUT THE RIGHT TO
BE NAMED ST. AND RELATED
PROCESSES AS INCLUDED IN THE
PACKET FOR MOTION I SAW FIRST
SECONDED BY JULIE AND ALL THOSE
IN FAVOR PLEASE RAISE YOUR HAND
PHYSICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND OR
SAY YES YES ALTHOUGH OPPOSED.
ALL RIGHT MOTION PASSES WE HAVE
RECOMMENDATION&apos;S.
THANKS EVERYONE.
SO THIS IS ANOTHER THIS IS NOT
AN ORDER THIS IS MAYBE AN ORDER
OF BUSINESS.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, EXACTLY.
THIS ONE&apos;S A LITTLE IT&apos;S ON THE
BUSINESS SECTION OF THE AGENDA
BECAUSE WE WANTED TO MAKE SURE
THAT IF YOU HAVE A A ACTION
THAT IF YOU&apos;RE IF YOU&apos;RE GOING
TO TAKE AN ACTION ON IT WE
WANTED TO HAVE GIVE YOU THAT
LATITUDE BECAUSE SOME OF THE
OPTIONS THAT JANE IS ABOUT TO
DISCUSS MIGHT REQUIRE REMOVAL
OF PARKING AND AS YOU KNOW,
REMOVAL OF PARKING TICKETS CITY
COUNCIL.
SO WE JUST WANTED TO GIVE YOU
THAT LATITUDE.
IT DOESN&apos;T NECESSARILY REQUIRE
ACTION AND AS JANE WILL
EXPLAIN, THE STAFF
RECOMMENDATION MAY NOT REQUIRE
ACTION BY COUNCIL BUT THAT&apos;S A
GOOD INTRO FOR FOR JANE ALLEN
WHO I THINK IS GOING TO REVIEW
THE SLIDE DECK OF THE SOMETHING
GREEN BAY PROJECT.
&gt;&gt; SO GREAT.
&gt;&gt; LET&apos;S JUST DOVE RIGHT IN.
GOOD EVENING, EVERYONE.
MY NAME&apos;S JANE ALLEN RAYMOND
AND I&apos;M THE MANAGER CURRENTLY
FOR THE 7TH AND GREENVIEW 7TH
AND GREENVIEW PROJECT FOR NEXT
YEAR.
THAT&apos;S BETWEEN SELF STYLED
TOWNSHIP
I&apos;M SORRY SOUTH CHURCH
ROAD AND TO THE SOUTH GREEN YOU
WILL GO TO SOUTH SEVENTH STREET
AND 7TH STREET WILL GO DOWN TO
LAWTON ELEMENTARY SCHOOL.
SO WE DID A PRESENTATION A WEEK
AGO TUESDAY TO THE ENTIRE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
ANYONE WHO WANTED TO COME IN
ALSO THAT PRESENTATION IS ON
OUR WEBSITE WHICH I&apos;LL GIVE YOU
THAT WEBSITE AT THE END OF THIS
PRESENTATION.
AND SO THIS IS THE A SMALLER
VERSION OF THAT PRESENTATION
JUST REGARDS TO THE ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION ELEMENTS THAT WE
DISCUSSED WITH THE RESIDENTS.
SO I&apos;M GOING TO SHARE MY SCREEN
.
JANE, YOUR SCREEN HERE IS GOING
OH, THERE YOU GO.
YOU&apos;RE GOOD.
OK, SO THIS IS THE SEVENTH
GREENVIEW TWO THOUSAND TWENTY
THREE CONSTRUCTION PROJECT
PRIMARILY IT WAS A WATER MAIN
PLACEMENT PROJECT BUT WE&apos;RE
GOING TO BE DOING SOME SURFACE
CHANGES NOT ON GREENVIEW THOSE
PROBLEMS WILL NOT MOVE AND THE
USES OF GREENVILLE WILL NOT
CHANGE BUT FOR 7TH STREET IT&apos;S
SO WIDE AND THERE IS NO CLEAR
INDICATION OF HOW PEOPLE ARE
USING IT IF THEY KNEW WHERE
THEY SHOULD BE WITHIN THE
PURBLIND AND THERE ARE SOME
DRAINAGE ISSUES BASED ON THE
IMPERVIOUS AREA AND AND ALSO
BASED ON THE TRANSPORTATION
PLAN AND ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
ARE CORYDON WORK.
SO SEVEN IS IN LINE FOR
IMPROVEMENTS WITH BIKE LANES,
CROSSWALKS AND SUCH.
SO HERE IS THE PROJECT LOCATION
THAT&apos;S SOUTH OF SILE CHURCH AND
YOU DO SEE THAT SEVEN GOES DOWN
TO ONE ON.
SO WE DISCUSSED THE PROJECT
GOAL WHICH IS THE WATER MAIN
REPLACEMENT SOME STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT WE ARE GOING TO BE
ABLE TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE
TRENCHES LEFT BY THE ABANDONED
WATER MAIN AND THE NEW WATER
MAIN TO CREATE SOME
INFILTRATION TRENCHES TO DELAY
THE FIRST FLUSH TO THE STORM
SYSTEM.
SO WE&apos;LL BE ABLE TO RETAIN SOME
WATER IN THOSE AREAS UNTIL IT
CAN ENTER THE STORM SYSTEM.
THEN WE&apos;LL BE RESURFACING BOTH
ROADS FOR THE FULL SECTION
OF THE ROAD AND THEN DISCUSSED
TONIGHT IS THE ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION OPTIONS THAT WE
HAVE AND IT&apos;S ALSO SO WE WANTED
PEOPLE TO BE ABLE TO GET TO
SCHOOL AND PEDESTRIANS AND
CYCLISTS THE MAJOR AREAS IN
THAT NEIGHBORHOOD AND THE PARK
.
SO THEY HAVE TO BE ABLE TO
COMMUTE WITHIN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
BUT ALSO OUTSIDE OF THEIR
NEIGHBORHOOD.
SO WE NEED TO GET THEM OUT TO
OUR CHURCH AND THEN ALSO HAVE A
CONTINUED CORRIDOR FOR THEM TO
GET AROUND EITHER TO DOWNTOWN
OR ALL OF ANN ARBOR.
THEY CAN TAKE THEY CAN
APPRECIATE EVERYTHING THE CITY
HAS TO OFFER.
SO TO TALK ABOUT ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES NETWORKING I&apos;M SURE
ALL OF YOU ARE AWARE BUT IT
FOCUSED ON HAVING THE NETWORK
AVAILABLE AND HAVE ACCESS
POINTS AVAILABLE AND HAVE
FACILITY ITSELF BE OPEN TO ALL
KINDS WRITERS.
SO YOU HAVE CHILDREN, SENIORS,
PEOPLE OF COLOR, WOMEN, PEOPLE
DOING A RIDE SHARE LOW INCOME
RIDERS, PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES AND EVEN HAPPEN
LIKE SO WE WANT TO MAKE THESE
CORRIDORS SAFE, COMFORTABLE AND
EQUITABLE FOR A WIDE RANGE
OF CYCLISTS.
SO TONIGHT WE&apos;RE JUST TALKING
ABOUT THE ALL AGES ABILITIES
NETWORK FOR THE BIKE LANE IN
THE PROJECT ITSELF WE ARE
PUTTING IN CROSSWALKS PUMP OUT
AND WE&apos;RE DOING THOSE KIND
OF ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION ITEMS
FOR PEDESTRIANS.
BUT THIS DISCUSSION IS ABOUT
THE BIKE
.
&gt;&gt; SO WE USE THE CITY&apos;S
COMPREHENSIVE TRANSPORTATION
PLAN AND YOU CAN ALSO WE WERE
TELLING PEOPLE AT THE MEETING
THAT THEY COULD GO TO AND ARE
MOVING TOGETHER TO LEARN ABOUT
OUR VISION ZERO.
SO HOW WOULD THE STREETS CHANGE
AGAIN?
&gt;&gt; THIS IS JUST THE EXISTING
CONDITIONS HERE THE STREET AND
CURRENTLY IT&apos;S BEING USE A
CROSS SECTION OF THE FULL WIDTH
WHICH IS ABOUT FORTY TWO FEET.
IT&apos;S NOT LARGE.
SO WE HAVE PARKING ON BOTH
SIDES OF THE ROAD.
WE HAVE SIDEWALK ON BOTH SIDES
SEPARATED BY A BIT OF AN
EASEMENT AND THE BIKES AND THE
CARS SUPPOSEDLY SHARE THE ROAD
IN BETWEEN PARKING AND THERE&apos;S
VERY WIDE WE CAN DEFINITELY
PROVIDE SOME SAFE
TRANSPORTATION FOR THE CYCLISTS
I BELIEVE HOWEVER THIS BECAUSE
OF THE CLASS OF THE ROAD, THE
SPEED AND THE FACT THAT IT&apos;S SO
LOCAL RESIDENTIAL WHAT THEY
HAVE EXISTING SATISFIES ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES GUIDELINES.
HOWEVER, THERE ARE SOME FURTHER
OPTIONS.
SO RIGHT NOW THIS IS CHERYL.
WE COULD IMPROVE THIS JUST BY
USING THE SAME USE BUT
PROVIDING SOME PAVEMENT
MARKINGS AND THAT WAY WE COULD
ALSO MAKE THE LANE A BIT
SMALLER THAN WHAT PEOPLE
POWERCOR CURRENTLY USE BECAUSE
NORMALLY THE PARKING IS ONLY
SEVEN FEET SO WE KIND OF MARK
IT SO IT&apos;S A LITTLE BIT WIDER
SO THE LANES ARE A BIT SMALLER
SO PEOPLE MAY GO SLOWER.
THIS IS JUST TO MARK WHAT
THEY&apos;RE CURRENTLY USING THAT WE
THINK THEY&apos;RE USEFUL.
THEY&apos;RE THE OPTIONS THAT WE
DISCUSSED NOW IS TO TAKE OUT A
SHARED USE SPACE FOR BIKES AND
MOTORISTS AND CREATE EITHER A
DESIGNATED BIKE LANE WHICH IS
YOUR STANDARD BIKE LANE.
IT&apos;S FIVE FEET WIDE.
WE COULD ALSO DO A BUFFORD BIKE
LANE THAT WOULD BE A THREE FOOT
WIDE BUFFER SPACE AND THEN DOWN
THE ROAD OR EVEN POSSIBLY IN
THE NEAR FUTURE WE WILL BE ABLE
TO MAINTAIN BIKE LANES THAT ARE
ONLY FIVE FEET WIDE.
SO WE WOULD BE ABLE TO PUT
BOLLARDS OF IN THE SPACE AND
HAVE A SEPARATE BIKE LANE THAT
WOULD BE EVEN MORE SAFE.
SO THESE WERE OPPOSITE IT TO
EVERYBODY.
THIS EXAMPLE IS JUST A FORWARD
SECTION WITH A DESIGNATED BIKE
LANE SO THE PARKING WOULD STILL
BE AT THE EDGE OF THE CURBS.
WE WOULD HAVE A TEN FOOT LANES
FOR THE MOTORIST AND FIVE FOOT
BIKE NOW IF WE DECIDED TO
BUTTON BIKE LANES WE WOULD HAVE
TO REMOVE PARKING ON ONE SIDE
BECAUSE WE DON&apos;T SPACE FOR THAT
EXTRA SIX FEET THAT WE ARE
OFFERING FOR THE BUFFER.
SO YOU WOULD STILL HAVE TEN
FOOT LANES, FIVE FOOT BIKE
LANES, YOU&apos;D HAVE THE THREE
FOOT BUFFER AND YOU WOULD ONLY
HAVE PARKING ON ONE SIDE OF THE
STREET.
THIS WOULD AS WE MENTIONED,
REQUIRE THE APPROVAL OF CITY
COUNCIL TO REMOVE ICE FREE
PARKING FOR MORE THAN ONE BLOCK
.
THIS IS THE FUTURE IF IT MIGHT
BE A SEPARATED BIKE LANE WE
WOULD PUT SOME VERTICAL
SEPARATION ELEMENTS THERE TO
KEEP BICYCLISTS FEELING EVEN
SAFER.
THE OTHER CROSS SECTIONS ARE
GOING TO BE COMING WHEN YOU
APPROACH INTERSECTION OR A MID
BLOCK CROSSING WHERE WE&apos;RE
GOING TO PROPOSE BUMP OUT ON
SOME OF THESE LOCATIONS HAVE
BUMP OUTS ONLY ON THE ONE SIDE
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF INTERSECTIONS
OUT THERE ALONG SIDE SEVEN BUT
WE DO PROPOSE A BLOCK CROSSING
ABOUT ON GREENVIEW AS IT ENTERS
THE PARK FOR THE SCHOOL.
&gt;&gt; SO HERE ARE GOOSEBUMP ABOUT
LOCATIONS AS I SAID I THINK DO
THERE YOU HAVE TO THE SCHOOL ON
THE INTERSECTION AND GREENVIEW
AND S7 WE HAVE BUMP OUTS ON ALL
FOUR QUADRANTS THEN THE TWO
SIDE INTERSECT LANDS WAY AND
BRAESIDE PLACE ARE KEY
INTERSECTIONS AND SO THEY WOULD
ONLY HAVE THE VOTES ON THE SIDE
STREET SIDE SO IN ONE OF THOSE
CROSS SECTIONS WHEN IT&apos;S ON
THAT P INTERSECTION WITH JUST A
SINGLE BUMP OUT THE SHARED
SPACE WITH MOTORISTS WOULD LOOK
LIKE THIS OBVIOUSLY BEHIND THAT
TREE FURTHER DOWN IN STATIONING
FURTHER UP YOU&apos;D HAVE PARKING
SO YOU&apos;D STILL HAVE THE PARKING
ON BOTH SIDES ONLY NOT WHEN
IT&apos;S AT THE INTERSECTION AND
INCIDENTALLY INTERSECTION BUMPS
DO NOT TAKE AWAY ANY LEGAL
PARKING THAT IS OUT THERE NOW
BECAUSE YOU&apos;RE NOT SUPPOSED TO
PARK NEAR INTERSECTIONS THE
LENGTH OF THE BUMBO ANYWAY THE
THE ONE BUMP OUT THAT MAY CAUSE
THE ELIMINATION ON STREET
PARKING IS ABOUT FOUR SPACES ON
GREENVIEW OK BECAUSE CURRENTLY
THERE IS LEGAL PARKING AT THAT
LOCATION IF WE HAVE DESIGNATED
BIKE LANE THAT SINGLE LOCATION
WOULD LOOK A BIT LIKE THIS.
WE WOULD HAVE THE PARKING TO
BIKE LANES IN TWO TEN DRIVES
AND OF COURSE LIKE I SAID
BEHIND THAT TREE CONTINUES TO
BE PARK.
&gt;&gt; IF WE HAD A BUMPER BIKE LANE
AS I SAID EARLIER PARKING WOULD
BE ELIMINATED ON ONE SIDE
ALREADY WE WOULD HAVE THE
BUFFER BIKE LANE OF A TOTAL
OF EIGHT FEET TEN FOOT LANES
AND THEN BEHIND THAT TREE
WOULDN&apos;T HAVE PARKING.
&gt;&gt; NOW IN THOSE SECTIONS
AT THE
MIDPOINT CROSSING WELL NOT
NECESSARILY IN OUR CROSSING
BECAUSE GREENVILLE IS NOT GOING
TO CHANGE ITS LANE WITH BUT AT
GREENVIEW AND 7TH WHEN WE HAVE
SPOTS ON BOTH SIDES THIS IS
WHAT THE SHARED SPACES WOULD
LOOK LIKE IF WE KEEP THAT
TWELVE AND A HALF FOOT LANES
IT&apos;S NOT AS NARROW AS TEN FOOT
THAT WOULD PROMOTE SLOWER
SPEEDS BUT IT IS QUITE MORE
NARROW THAN WHAT&apos;S CURRENTLY
BEING USED.
&gt;&gt; IF WE HAD THE DESIGNATED
BIKE LANE WE COULD STILL GET
THAT CROSS SECTION THROUGH THE
TOOLBAR BUT WE HAVE TWO LANES
IN TWO DESIGNATED CYCLING AND
THEN YOU HAVE PARKING BEYOND
THOSE TREES THE BUMPER BIKE
LANE.
WE DON&apos;T HAVE ENOUGH SPACE TO
CARRY THE BUFFER THROUGH THE
INTERSECTION WHERE THERE&apos;S LOTS
OF BOTH SIDES BUT WE WOULD BE
ABLE TO TRANSITION THE BUFFER
DOWN TO A DESIGNATED BIKE LANE
JUST THROUGH THAT INTERSECTION
AND THIS IS HOW THAT WILL
BACKSPACE THIS THIS SAYS
BUFFER.
BUT THIS SLIDE WOULD BE
SEPARATED SO IT WOULD LOOK THE
SAME.
WE&apos;D HAVE TO GET RID OF THAT
BUFFER AND THE THE THE VERTICAL
FEATURES THROUGH THE
INTERSECTION.
&gt;&gt; SO WE PRESENTED THIS TO
THEM.
THERE WAS A SURVEY ONLINE TWO
WEEKS PRIOR TO THE MEETING AND
IT DIDN&apos;T CLOSE UNTIL A WEEK
AFTER.
SO IT CLOSED LAST NIGHT AT
MIDNIGHT ACTUALLY I THINK WE
DIDN&apos;T GET CLOSE TILL THIS
MORNING BUT THERE WERE A BIT
MORE INFORMATION PROVIDED THAN
WHAT WE LOOKED AT YESTERDAY.
SO WE HAVE THE PROJECT WEBSITE
THAT TALKED A LITTLE ABOUT HOW
THIS PROJECT IS BEING FUNDED ON
SOME OF THE ALTERNATIVE YOU
KNOW, THE ACTIVE PRECIPITATION
FEATURES THAT WE&apos;RE DISCUSSING
HOW WE WANT TO USE THEIR
FEEDBACK.
SO WE TOOK A SURVEY WE HAD
WRITING QUESTIONS AND COMMENTS
THAT WE ARE PUTTING A
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ON
ON THE WEBSITE SOON AFTER WE
GET THOSE QUESTIONS ANSWERED WE
HAD THE VIRTUAL INFORMATION
SESSION LAST WEEK IN WHICH
PEOPLE ASK QUESTIONS AND WE
WERE ABLE TO ALSO INCLUDE THOSE
QUESTIONS IN THE Q&amp;A AND THEN
HOW WILL THEIR FEEDBACK BE USED
?
SO AS I SAID AT THE BEGINNING,
ANY OF THESE BIKE NETWORKS
WOULD QUALIFY FOR THE
GUIDELINES SET BY ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES NETWORK AND ALSO WHAT
THE TRANSPORTATION PLAN HAS
RECOMMENDED FOR THIS QUARTER.
BUT WE DID OFFER TO DO SAME AS
DO WITH SOMETHING LIKE A
DESIGNATED BY CLEAN THAT&apos;S
STANDARD YOU HAVE YOUR OWN
SPACE.
YOU&apos;RE NOT QUITE SEPARATED FROM
THE TRAVELING PUBLIC THEN YOU&apos;D
HAVE THE OFFER WHERE YOU HAVE
THREE FEET OF SPACE AND THEN
FINALLY YOU HAVE TO SEPARATE IT
WHERE YOU WOULD ACTUALLY HAVE A
VERTICAL BARRIER BETWEEN YOU
AND SO THE FEEDBACK THAT WE GOT
FROM THE SURVEY I ONLY JUST PUT
THIS IN THE DEMOGRAPHICS
BECAUSE IT&apos;S AN ALL AGE AND
ABILITIES I COULD JUST BRING
OUT JUST A LITTLE BIT OF THAT
INFORMATION ON THE DEMOGRAPHIC
QUESTIONS.
BUT I DID NOTICE THAT FORTY SIX
PERCENT OF THE RESPONDENTS WERE
GREATER THAN FIFTY AND I THINK
THAT QUALIFIES AS A SENIOR AT
LEAST THROUGH OUR GROUP.
AND THEN ALTHOUGH IT WASN&apos;T
REPORTED IN THE DEMOGRAPHICS
BECAUSE NOT EVERYONE HAD TO
RESPOND TO THOSE QUESTIONS BUT
THE ONLY OF ONE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY ONE OF THE TWO HUNDRED
AND FORTY SIX TOTAL RESPONDENTS
ANSWERED THE DEMOGRAPHIC
QUESTION OF AGE.
BUT IN THE THE ORIGINAL SURVEY
I WAS ABLE TO GET THE
INFORMATION THAT ABOUT FOUR
POINT SEVEN PERCENT SURVEY WERE
SCHOOL CHILDREN UNDER TWELVE.
GREAT.
AND THEN AS FAR AS GENDER THE
ONLY THING I MEAN IS JUST
ANYONE THAT&apos;S PRETTY MUCH NOT A
MALE BASED ON THE ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES GROUPS I HAD
MENTIONED EARLIER ON I THINK
WHITE MALE MALES THE STANDARD
NOT THE STANDARD BUT LIKE WHAT
BASIS AND SO THEN WOMEN OTHER
GENDERS.
SO WE HAD THIRTY NEARLY FORTY
PERCENT OF THE PEOPLE WHO DID
RESPOND WERE NOT MALE.
I ENCOURAGE YOU TO LOOK AT THE
RESULTS AND I HAVE THE WEBSITE
ON A FURTHER PAGE BUT YOU CAN
SEE ALL THE FEEDBACK FROM
EVERYBODY ON EACH QUESTION.
YOU CAN ALSO DO IT BY MATH AND
YOU CAN DO THE ENTIRE AREA THAT
WAS YOU KNOW THAT RESPONDED AND
YOU CAN BREAK IT DOWN PER WARD.
THERE&apos;S A FEW OTHER MAPS ON
THERE THAT RELATE WITH
DIFFERENT PROJECT AND I WASN&apos;T
ABLE TO GET THE PROJECT AREA IN
A MAP PRIOR TO SO I CAN&apos;T
FILTER THROUGH IT AT THE MOMENT
.
BUT SOME OF THE HIGHLIGHTS
OF ALL THE RESPONDENTS TWENTY
FIFTY SIX ONE HUNDRED SIXTY ONE
ARE IN WARD FOUR AND ONE
HUNDRED THIRTY SIX ARE IN THE
PROJECT AREA SO THOSE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY SIX I CAN&apos;T PIN DOWN
THE PERCENTAGE OF HOW THEY
ANSWERED BUT WE DO KNOW THAT
YOU KNOW SEVENTY FIVE PERCENT
OF THE PEOPLE WHO ARE IN WARD
FOUR WERE PART OF THIS
NEIGHBORHOOD AND THEIR
CONCERNED ABOUT WHAT WE DO.
&gt;&gt; SO WHEN ASKED HOW DO YOU
KNOW WHAT ARE YOU ARE YOU A
STUDENT, A TEACHER OR PARENT OR
ARE YOU A BICYCLIST, A
PEDESTRIAN, A MOTORIST THAT
SORT THING ON IT?
THEY SAID THAT THEY COULD
ANSWER MULTIPLE TO THIS
QUESTION BUT THEY CLAIMED THAT
THEY WERE A BIKER OF ALL THE
RESPONDENTS ABOUT FIFTY ONE
PERCENT SAID THAT THEY BIKE AND
IN THE WARD FOR NEARLY 70
PERCENT PEOPLE SAY THEY BIKE.
AND THEN ANOTHER QUESTION
RELATES TO THE BIKE LANES AND A
POSSIBLE LIMITATION ON FREE
PARKING WAS DID THEY USE
PARKING ON CELL SEVEN MAYBE
ONCE OR TWICE A YEAR OR NEVER?
AND THOSE ANSWERS WERE ABOUT
SEVENTY SEVEN PERCENT FOR ALL
WHICH MAKES SENSE BECAUSE NOT
EVERYONE WAS IN THE AREA AND
THEN FOR AWARD FOR ABOUT SIXTY
SEVEN PERCENT TO NOT PARK ON
THE STREET AND THEN THE
QUESTION DOWN BELOW IS AN
EXAMPLE WHERE WE ASKED IF THEY
DIDN&apos;T WANT ANYTHING IF THEY
WANT THE SHARED USE BY
SCROLLING DESIGNATED BY GOING
THE SEPARATE LANE OR A BUMPER
BIKE IF THEY WANTED ANY TYPE
OF BIKE LANE SO DESIGNATED
SEPARATED AND BUFFORD I ADDED
THOSE TOGETHER.
SO OF THE ENTIRE RESPONDENTS
ABOUT SEVENTY ONE PERCENT WANT
SOME TYPE OF CYCLING AND IN
WARD OR OVER FIFTY PERCENT AND
THERE IS MAYBE SOME CONFUSION I
THINK BETWEEN THE OPERATE AND
SEPARATED THIS IS MY OPINION
BUT I THINK THE PEOPLE WHO
RESPONDED WERE SEPARATED.
THEY WOULDN&apos;T BE OPPOSED TO
BUFFER THEY JUST WANTED
SOMETHING AT THE EXTREME SIDE.
SO I DON&apos;T THINK THAT THEY
WOULD NOT USE THE THE BUFFER
BIKE LANE IF IT DIDN&apos;T HAVE A
VERTICAL SEPARATION.
SO THE STAFF HAS REVIEWED THE
SURVEY RESULTS, EMAILS THAT
HAVE COME IN, COMMENTS THAT
THEY PUT IN ON THE THE VIRTUAL
INFORMATION SESSION AS WELL.
IS THE SURVEY OPEN QUESTIONS
AND WHAT THE SURVEY DIDN&apos;T
REALLY TELL YOU IS THAT WE&apos;VE
GOTTEN A LOT OF PUSHBACK
BECAUSE PEOPLE DON&apos;T WANT TO
LOSE THEIR HANDS FREE PARKING
AND I&apos;VE HAD TO CLARIFY WITH
SOME PEOPLE YOU KNOW, THE THREE
SCENARIOS ONLY THAT WOULD
ELIMINATE ENTRY PARKING AS I
MENTIONED BEFORE, THE BUMP OUT
MID BAR CROSSING ON GREENVIEW
THAT MIGHT ELIMINATE OR PARKING
SPOTS THEN THE FIRST BLOCK
OF SOUTH OF S 7TH FROM SOUTH
CHURCH TO EMBRACE SIDE PLACE
THAT HAS THE ISLAND THAT WAS
INSTALLED IN ANOTHER PROJECT
AND BECAUSE OF ITS WIDTH AND
ITS PERMANENT SEAT AT THE
CENTER OF ANY KIND OF BIKE LANE
THAT&apos;S NOT SHARED USE WOULD
REQUIRE THE ELIMINATION
OF PARKING ON THAT FIRST BLOCK.
FORTUNATELY THREE OF THE FOUR
HOMEOWNERS THERE HAVE ACCESS TO
THEIR HOUSE THROUGH A SIDE
STREET AND THIS IS NOT MORE
THAN ONE BLOCK OF ENTRY PARKING
SO WE WOULD NOT NEED TO GO TO
CITY COUNCIL FOR APPROVAL.
THE LAST SCENARIO WOULD BE IF
WE PUT IN A BUFFER BIKE LANE OR
A SEPARATE BIKE LANE WE WOULD
HAVE TO ELIMINATE STREET
PARKING ON ONE SIDE OF THE ROAD
FOR THE ENTIRE LENGTH OF THE
PROJECT.
SO WHAT WE HAVE PROPOSED IS
JUST TO DO A DESIGNATED BIKE
LANE THAT A FIVE FOOT BIKE LANE
ON BOTH SIDES BETWEEN S CHURCH
AND LORTON ELEMENTARY.
THEY&apos;LL BE TWO TEN FOOT
TRAVELED LANES IN BOTH
DIRECTIONS AND TWO SEVEN AND A
HALF FOOT ARGUMENTS ON BOTH
SIDE.
WE COME TO THIS DECISION
BECAUSE WE WANT TO WANT TO MEET
THE TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES GUIDELINES
AND IT DOES THAT WE WANT TO
MAKE A COMPROMISE BETWEEN THE
SUCH DIVERGENT ANSWERS THAT
PEOPLE EITHER WANTED.
IT SEEMED LIKE THE TOP TWO
ANSWERS A PERCENTAGE WISE AT
SURVEY OR EITHER THEY WANTED TO
KEEP SHARE YUSAF OR THEY WANTED
TO SEPARATED BIKE LANES.
SO IT WAS REALLY DIVERGENT AND
SO TO
MAKE A COMPROMISE TO KEEP
THE PARKING BUT ALSO TO PROVIDE
A DESIGNATED BIKE LANE ON THIS
IS WHAT WE ARE PROPOSING FOR
THIS PROJECT AND IT DOES
MAINTAIN MOST OF THE CITY PARK.
AS I SAID, THOSE TWO LOCATIONS
AT THE BLOCK CROSSING AND THAT
FIRST BLACK SOUTH OF SOUTH
CHURCH AND S SEVEN THEY WOULD
LOSE PARKING REGARDLESS.
SO HERE&apos;S THE LINK TO THE FULL
SURVEY RESULTS IF YOU KNOW HOW
TO GET TO TO OPEN CITY HALL YOU
CAN GO TO CLOSED TOPICS AND
THEN GO TO FEEDBACK AND THEN
YOU COULD SEE EVERYONE&apos;S
RESPONSE AND MY INFORMATION
THERE AND THEN ALSO THE PROJECT
WEBSITE WHICH HAS A LINK TO THE
SURVEY AND IT HAS INFORMATION
AS A LINK TO OUR REPORTING
OF LAST WEEK&apos;S MEETING AND WE
WILL ALSO BE PUTTING THIS
PRESENTATION AND A LINK TO THIS
PRESENTATION OR THE ENTIRE
MEETING FOR THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION ON THE WEBSITE TOO.
AND I&apos;LL LEAVE IT UP FOR ANY
KIND OF FEEDBACK YOU LIKE
.
I WAS JUST HOPING I WASN&apos;T ON
MUTE THAT WHOLE TIME WE WOULD
HAVE TOLD YOU.
THANK YOU SO MUCH WAS GREAT.
I WAS TYPING SOME LAST NOTES.
I&apos;M GOING TO OPEN IT UP TO
COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS I SAW
BRET AND THEN JULIE, THANK YOU.
A COUPLE QUESTIONS FOR THE
VERTICAL ELEMENTS HOW THOSE
INTERACT WITH THE MAINTENANCE
OF PARKING.
I&apos;M JUST WONDERING HOW DO CARS
GET IN AND OUT OF A PARALLEL
PARKING SPOT IF THERE&apos;S A BIKE
LANE AND THEN A VERTICAL
ELEMENTS PERIODICALLY AND SO
WITH TWENTY FIVE THIRTY IN THIS
AREA IT IS A NEIGHBORHOOD I
WASN&apos;T SURE THAT WOULD BE
TWENTY FIVE ON IT IS TWENTY
FIVE OF THE LOCAL RESIDENTIAL
REAL ESTATE MARKET WITHIN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD BUT IT IS TWENTY
FIVE MILES.
&gt;&gt; OK AND DID YOU GUYS LOOK
INTO CURRENT PARKING USAGE.
&gt;&gt; WE DID NOT TAKE LIKE A POLL
OR A SURVEY FROM LIKE EMPLOYEES
GOING OUT THERE AND COUNTING
THEM BUT WE ASKED THE QUESTION
IF YOU WANT TO GO TO THOSE
INDIVIDUAL FEEDBACK RESULTS WE
ASKED THE QUESTION HOW OFTEN DO
THEY SEE PARKING ONE HUNDRED
PERCENT OF TIME AND IT WAS LIKE
RARELY SOMETIMES AND NEVER
ANYTHING.
AND THEN IT WAS HOW OFTEN DO
YOU SEE FIFTY PERCENT OF THE
TIME.
TWENTY FIVE PERCENT OF THE
SO THOSE ANSWERS CHANGE AS THEY
TIME.
ARE.
SO THOSE ANSWERS CHANGE AS THEY
IT WAS VERY HIGH PERCENTAGE
ARE.
THAT THEY NEVER CEASE OF BEING
IT WAS VERY HIGH PERCENTAGE
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT ON TIME BUT
THAT THEY NEVER CEASE OF BEING
THEN WHEN YOU GET DOWN TO
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT ON TIME BUT
TWENTY FIVE PERCENT OF THE TIME
THEN WHEN YOU GET DOWN TO
YOU GET LESS NEIGHBORS.
TWENTY FIVE PERCENT OF THE TIME
PEOPLE DO SEE CARS THERE.
YOU GET LESS NEIGHBORS.
&gt;&gt; YEAH I MEAN YEAH IT IS A
PEOPLE DO SEE CARS THERE.
VERY DENSE NEIGHBORHOOD WITH
&gt;&gt; YEAH I MEAN YEAH IT IS A
EVERY HOUSE HAS A DRIVEWAY SO I
VERY DENSE NEIGHBORHOOD WITH
APPRECIATE THAT WHAT YOU&apos;RE
EVERY HOUSE HAS A DRIVEWAY SO I
PROPOSING IS A COMPROMISE.
APPRECIATE THAT WHAT YOU&apos;RE
I JUST WONDERED THERE COULD BE
PROPOSING IS A COMPROMISE.
SOME MORE JUSTIFICATION FOR
I JUST WONDERED THERE COULD BE
KEEPING PARKING AT BOTH SIDES
SOME MORE JUSTIFICATION FOR
BUT THERE IS STILL THE QUESTION
KEEPING PARKING AT BOTH SIDES
ABOUT HOW DO WITH VERTICAL
BUT THERE IS STILL THE QUESTION
ELEMENTS INTERACT WITH CARS
ABOUT HOW DO WITH VERTICAL
PARKING GETTING IN AND OUT?
ELEMENTS INTERACT WITH CARS
&gt;&gt; I MAYBE RAYMOND COULD HELP
PARKING GETTING IN AND OUT?
ME WITH THIS ANSWER BECAUSE I
&gt;&gt; I MAYBE RAYMOND COULD HELP
DON&apos;T KNOW THE DISTANCE BETWEEN
ME WITH THIS ANSWER BECAUSE I
THOSE VERTICAL ELEMENTS.
DON&apos;T KNOW THE DISTANCE BETWEEN
I&apos;VE SEEN THEM INSTALLED AROUND
THOSE VERTICAL ELEMENTS.
THE CITY AND I KNOW THERE&apos;S
I&apos;VE SEEN THEM INSTALLED AROUND
PARKING BEHIND THEM SO I KNOW
THE CITY AND I KNOW THERE&apos;S
CARS CAN GET IN THERE AND
PARKING BEHIND THEM SO I KNOW
PARALLEL PARK I DON&apos;T KNOW THE
CARS CAN GET IN THERE AND
DISTANCE BETWEEN THE WELL AND
PARALLEL PARK I DON&apos;T KNOW THE
TO CLARIFY TO JANE AND BRAD MY
DISTANCE BETWEEN THE WELL AND
UNDERSTANDING IS THE THE OPTION
TO CLARIFY TO JANE AND BRAD MY
THAT IS THE SEPARATED OR
UNDERSTANDING IS THE THE OPTION
PROTECTED BIKE LANE WHICH WOULD
THAT IS THE SEPARATED OR
INCLUDE THOSE VERTICAL ELEMENTS
PROTECTED BIKE LANE WHICH WOULD
THERE WOULD NOT BE ON STREET
INCLUDE THOSE VERTICAL ELEMENTS
PARKING ON THOSE SIDES THAT
THERE WOULD NOT BE ON STREET
HAVE THOSE VERTICAL ELEMENTS.
PARKING ON THOSE SIDES THAT
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
HAVE THOSE VERTICAL ELEMENTS.
SO IT IT YEAH.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
SO THERE WOULD BE SPACES FOR
SO IT IT YEAH.
THE DRIVEWAYS BETWEEN THOSE
SO THERE WOULD BE SPACES FOR
DELINEATE AREAS.
THE DRIVEWAYS BETWEEN THOSE
THERE WOULD BE OPPORTUNITIES
DELINEATE AREAS.
AND IF THERE WERE ON STREET
THERE WOULD BE OPPORTUNITIES
PARKING WE COULD SPACE THE
AND IF THERE WERE ON STREET
DELINEATOR IN SUCH A WAY THAT
PARKING WE COULD SPACE THE
VEHICLES COULD PULL IN AND PULL
DELINEATOR IN SUCH A WAY THAT
OUT.
VEHICLES COULD PULL IN AND PULL
BY AND LARGE THE THAT&apos;S WHY
OUT.
PARKING WOULD HAVE TO BE
BY AND LARGE THE THAT&apos;S WHY
REMOVED AND THAT WAS AN OPTION
PARKING WOULD HAVE TO BE
FOR THOSE VERTICAL
REMOVED AND THAT WAS AN OPTION
DENOMINATOR&apos;S.
FOR THOSE VERTICAL
&gt;&gt; SO I&apos;M GOING TO JUST SHARE
DENOMINATOR&apos;S.
MY SCREEN AGAIN AND GO BACK TO
&gt;&gt; SO I&apos;M GOING TO JUST SHARE
THAT ONE SLIDE.
MY SCREEN AGAIN AND GO BACK TO
I THINK THAT WAS MISLEADING
THAT ONE SLIDE.
AFTER WHAT RAYMOND JUST SAID
HOOPSTER STEPPED
THOUGH IN THIS
EXAMPLE, RAYMOND, YOU&apos;RE SAYING
THAT IT WOULD ONLY BE THAT
VERTICAL ELEMENT WOULD ONLY BE
INSTALLED IN THE BUFFORD AREA
AND LET&apos;S SAY THE THE LEFT SIDE
OF THE SCREEN AND THEN ON THE
RIGHT WHERE THERE ARE STILL
GOING TO BE PARKING, WE
WOULDN&apos;T BE ABLE TO PUT THAT
VERTICAL ELEMENT WELL, WE COULD
PUT SOME PERIODICALLY BUT
THEY&apos;D HAVE TO BE SPACED VERY
FAR APART TO BE ALLOW VEHICLES
TO PULL IN AND PULL OUT THIS AS
YOU ALL KNOW, WE&apos;VE
EXPERIMENTED WITH FLOATING
PARKING LANE ON DIVISION WHICH
WAS MEANT TO KIND OF ELIMINATE
THIS KIND OF SITUATION BUT IT
DIDN&apos;T WORK OUT PARTICULARLY
WELL.
SO I UNDERSTAND WHY WE ARE
INTRODUCING THIS CONCEPT BUT
YEAH.
SO THAT DELINEATOR TO THE RIGHT
SIDE OF THE ROAD.
YEAH, RIGHT THERE WE&apos;RE JANE&apos;S
CURSOR IS WOULD DEFINITELY HAVE
TO BE MUCH LESS DENSE ON THE
OPPOSITE SIDE.
&gt;&gt; OK, I JUST WANT TO MAKE THAT
CLEAR BECAUSE I WASN&apos;T AWARE
THAT ANY OTHER FEEDBACK.
JULIE YEAH.
SO I HAD A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS
A ONE WAS ARE THE RESIDENTS
CONCERNED ABOUT SPEEDS ON THOSE
STREETS AND DO YOU KNOW WHAT
THE SPEEDS ARE?
&gt;&gt; NO, WE HAVE NOT TAKEN ANY
KEY OR SPEED.
WE DO HAVE PEOPLE REQUESTING A
SPEED LIMIT TO BE LOWERED AT
THIS POINT IS AN ENFORCEMENT
ISSUE.
WE CAN&apos;T LEGALLY LOWER ANYTHING
MORE THAN TWENTY FIVE WITHOUT I
THINK SPECIAL LEGAL ACTION AND
ALTHOUGH THAT DOES THIS THEY DO
A EIGHTY FIVE PERCENTILE OF THE
SPEEDS THAT ARE ACTUALLY BEING
DRIVEN THAT THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S WHEN
SOMEONE ASKED FOR THE SPEED
LIMIT ON THE STREET BELOW AND
THEY CAN&apos;T GO LOWER THAN THE
CENTER.
OF COURSE THIS IS THE IN THAT
PROJECT IT&apos;S NOT IN THAT ROAD
YOU KNOW WE COULD WE DON&apos;T HAVE
TO USE THAT RULE OF THUMB BUT
CURRENTLY OUR ONLY OPTION IS TO
KEEP IT AT TWENTY FIVE.
&gt;&gt; AND ARE YOU PLANNING TO POST
THE SPEED LIMIT?
YOU SAID IT WASN&apos;T POSTED.
NO, I&apos;D HAVE TO ASK RAYMOND
ABOUT THAT.
I HADN&apos;T YOU KNOW AS A LOCAL
NEIGHBORHOOD STREET WE DON&apos;T
NORMALLY POST THAT MILES AN
HOUR.
IT&apos;S IT&apos;S A FEATURE THAT MAKES
SENSE.
&gt;&gt; I JUST WONDERED IF RESIDENTS
KNEW WHAT THE SPEED LIMIT WAS
SUPPOSED TO BE.
MY OTHER QUESTION IS RELATED TO
WHAT THAT WAS ASKING IS I DON&apos;T
I THINK THE YOUR DESIGN IS
FINE.
YOUR PROPOSED DESIGN IS FINE
BUT I DON&apos;T REALLY UNDERSTAND
THE JUST THE NEED TO MAINTAIN
ALL THAT PARKING BASED ON WHAT
THE RESPONSES YOU GOT IN THE
SURVEY.
AND SO I JUST WANTED TO
UNDERSTAND A LITTLE BIT BETTER
WHY YOU FEEL THAT IT&apos;S
IMPORTANT TO MAINTAIN A PRETTY
MUCH ALL THE PARKING.
WELL, AS I SAID, THE DESIGN WAS
ACCEPTABLE TO ALL OF THOSE
ALTERNATIVES BASED ON THE
GUIDELINES THOUGH IT WAS
RECOMMENDED BY OUR
TRANSPORTATION ENGINEER THAT WE
DO WE COMPROMISE BECAUSE WHAT
YOU HAD SEEN I THINK THERE WAS
A SPECIFIC QUESTION ON THE
SURVEY THAT I COULD REPORT OUT
TO YOU BUT THE EMAILS AND THE
COMMENTS THAT WERE MADE MAYBE
BEFORE CLARIFICATION WAS GIVEN
BUT PEOPLE WERE VERY UPSET THAT
THEY THOUGHT THEY WERE TO LOSE
THEIR ON-STREET PARKING.
SO WE DID WE KNEW THAT THAT WAS
A CONTENTIOUS ITEM.
SO IF WE STICK WITH JUST THE
DESIGNATED BIKE LANE THAT GIVES
THEM SOME THEY&apos;RE THEIR OWN
SPACE.
WE CAN MAKE THE NEIGHBORHOOD
HAPPY WITH PARKING AND THEN YOU
KNOW, THAT&apos;S THE THAT&apos;S HOW
WE&apos;RE MOVING FORWARD UNLESS WE
HERE TO PETE AND THEN SUZETTE,
DO YOU ASK ABOUT PROBLEMS
OF SPEEDING AND I LIVE NEARBY
AND CAN CONFIRM THERE IS A
PROBLEM WITH SPEEDING AND THAT
ROAD IS SO WIDE THAT I FEEL
LIKE EVEN WITH THIS PROPOSAL
OF DESIGNATED BIKE LANES THAT
IT&apos;S GOING TO FEEL LIKE A PLACE
WE CAN GO FAST AND EVEN AFTER
WE HAVE PARKING AND BOTH SIDES
AND IT&apos;S STILL GOING TO FEEL
LIKE IT&apos;S OK TO GO FASTER.
UM, THE OTHER I GUESS THE OTHER
CONCERN I HAVE WITH THE JUST
THE THE FIVE FOOT BIKE LANE IS
THAT ON THAT AND THE ADJACENT
AREAS OF SEVEN YOU KNOW THERE
IT KIND OF PIONEER WE HAVE A
BUFFORD BIKE LANE AND THEN
NORTH OF STADIUM WE HAVE JUST A
STANDARD BIKE LANE I GUESS I
WOULD LIKE TO SEE BE MORE
CONSISTENT AND HAVE YOU KNOW
AND INSTEAD EXTEND THE BUFFORD
BIKE LANE TO THE SOUTH INTO THE
NEIGHBORHOOD RATHER THAN HAVE
IT GO BIKE LANE EVERY BIKE LANE
BIKE LANE THAT YOU&apos;RE GOING
FROM ONE PORTION OF THE SEVENTH
AND THE NEXT.
SO THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S MY OPINION ON
THE BIKE LANES IN THIS AREA.
THANKS, SUZANNE.
TO MY QUESTIONS WITH REGARDS TO
THE STAND TO WHAT DRIVEWAYS
USUALLY LOOK LIKE IN THIS AREA
LIKE I THINK IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD
NEAR DRIVEWAYS CAN&apos;T HOLD MORE
THAN ONE CAR.
SO I UNDERSTAND A LITTLE MORE
PEOPLE FEEL STRONGLY ABOUT ON
STREET PARKING BUT OUR HOMES IN
THIS AREA USUALLY ABLE TO
ACCOMMODATE TWO OR THREE CARS I
GUESS I DON&apos;T KNOW HOW
SERIOUSLY GETTING RID
OF PARKING WOULD AFFECT
PEOPLE&apos;S DAY TO DAY LIVES.
YEAH, THERE WAS ONE COMMENT
FROM A RESIDENT CLAIMING THAT
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF TEENAGERS IN
THE NEIGHBORHOOD AND I GUESS
WHEN YOU BECOME A TEENAGER AND
YOU&apos;RE DRIVING AROUND YOU HAVE
AN EXTRA CAR TO THE HOUSEHOLD.
THE COMMENT THAT WAS MADE IS
THAT THEY&apos;RE GOING TO HAVE TO
BE PARKING ON SIDE STREETS
QUITE FAR AWAY FROM THEIR HOMES
COMING HOME LATE AT NIGHT AFTER
STUDY AND IN THE DARK.
SO BUT AS I SAID, EVEN IF
BUFFER BIKE LANES WERE
INSTALLED, THERE&apos;D BE PARKING
ON ONE SIDE OF THE STREET.
SO IT&apos;S NOT IS VASTERAS IS
PEOPLE ARE IMAGINING THE SIDE
STREETS ARE CLOSE BY BUT PEOPLE
JUST DON&apos;T WANT TO LOSE THEIR
ANSARY PARKING.
IT DOES LOOK TO ME THAT MOST
THE DRIVEWAYS CAN ACCOMMODATE
TWO CARS SIDE BY SIDE AND THERE
ARE LONG ENOUGH TO STACK THEM.
BUT OF COURSE INVOLVES SOME
COORDINATION WHEN PEOPLE LEAVE
.
BUT THERE&apos;S ALSO THE DRIVEWAYS
IN THE AREA ARE SUBSTANTIAL
ENOUGH.
&gt;&gt; I COULD MOST CARS YES.
OK.
THE VAST MAJORITY OF THE
GARAGES IN THAT AREA ARE TWO
CAR GARAGES DRIVEWAYS ARE
OF WITH THE MATCH THAT SO WE&apos;RE
NOT FOR CARS SO OF COURSE
THEY&apos;RE PART OF THE PARKING.
YEAH.
ALL RIGHT I&apos;M GOING I&apos;M I LAST
MAY SEE THAT.
ARE YOU GOOD.
ALL YEAH I THINK I WAS PRETTY
MUCH JUST GOING TO SAY MORE
OF WHAT WE&apos;VE BEEN TALKING
ABOUT WHICH IS I WAS STROLLING
THROUGH ON STREET A LITTLE BIT.
THE DRIVEWAYS LOOK REALLY LARGE
AS A CYCLIST I WILL NOT RIDE A
BIKE LANE THAT IS IN THE DOOR
ZONE LIKE THAT.
SO ESPECIALLY I MEAN EVEN IF WE
WERE TO PUT UP PLASTIC CHAIRS
THEN I JUST WORRY THAT YOU&apos;VE
GOT A CYCLIST WHO&apos;S ESSENTIALLY
LIKE TRAPPED ALONGSIDE A CAR
THAT MAY OR MAY NOT LOOK BEFORE
THEY OPEN THEIR DOOR.
SO I&apos;M KIND OF CONCERNED ABOUT
THE IDEA OF MAINTAINING THE
STREET, WORKING A DOOR I MEAN A
BIKE LANE AND THE DOORS ZONE IS
NOT A BIKE LANE.
IS THAT IS YOUR PREFERENCE THEN
TO HAVE ELIMINATION
OF MANDATORY PARKING ON BOTH
SIDES?
IF WE&apos;RE GOING TO PUT BIKE
LANES AND I, I, I MEAN IF
YOU&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT AN ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES CYCLING
NETWORK I MEAN JUST MYSELF I AM
A VERY COMPETENT CYCLIST AND I
WILL NOT RIDE A BIKE LANE.
IT IS IN THE DOORJAMB LIKE
THAT.
SO AND IN MY VIEW IT WOULD NOT
QUALIFY ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
.
I&apos;LL BRING THAT BACK FOR OUR
TRANSPORTATION TEAM.
I THERE WAS A CONVERSATION THAT
WE DID HAVE ABOUT HAVING THE
BIKE LANE AT THE CURB AND THEN
BUT I WAS TOLD THAT THERE WAS
THERE HAD BEEN A LOT
OF PROBLEMS WITH LOADING
PARKING LANE AND THEN THEY
CAN&apos;T STAY IN THERE.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, THANK YOU.
YEAH I WAS CURIOUS ABOUT THE
PARKING PROJECTED LANE SO THAT
ANSWERS THAT QUESTION.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU FORREST TO LOOK AT
PETE.
I MEAN IN THIS AREA I WALK
AROUND BIKE ON THAT STREET ALL
THE TIME.
I REALLY DON&apos;T SEE A LOT
OF CYCLISTS BECAUSE IT&apos;S A
DEAD END STREET RIGHT AFTER LAW
SCHOOL THERE IS NOWHERE THEY
CAN GO.
IT&apos;S ONLY THE PEOPLE LOCAL
TRAFFIC OF COURSE SCHOOL
TRAFFIC.
SO WHENEVER I BIKE THERE OR
WALK THERE I DON&apos;T SEE A LOT
OF TRAFFIC.
I DON&apos;T SEE A LOT OF CYCLIST
AND THAT&apos;S WHY I THINK OF THE
THE RECOMMENDATION TO ME AS
APPROPRIATE.
OF COURSE YOU AS A CYCLIST YOU
FEEL LIKE THERE ALL THE TIME
YOU PROBABLY PREFER HAVE A
PROTECTED BUT THERE REALLY NOT
MUCH TRAFFIC.
I MEAN CORRECT ME IF I&apos;M WRONG
JANE, YOU MAY HAVE DONE SOME
COMMENTS BUT REALLY NOT A LOT
OF CYCLISTS.
I LIKE TO PLAY DEVIL&apos;S ADVOCATE
THE CYCLISTS HAVE A SAFE PLACE
TO RIDE THEIR BIKES SO MAYBE
THAT&apos;S WHY YOU DON&apos;T SEE THEM.
BUT IT WAS CONSIDERED AN ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES CORRIDOR
BECAUSE I THINK THERE ARE PLANS
IN THE FUTURE TO CONNECT THEIR
BIKE CORRIDOR BEYOND THAT CUL
DE SAC AND GET IT OUT AND
OBVIOUSLY IN ROAD.
THANK YOU.
MAYBE NICK COULD CONFIRM THAT.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, THERE&apos;S ALREADY A
CONNECTOR PATH THROUGH THE PARK
I THINK THAT CONNECTS TO THE
OTHER DEVELOPMENT TO THE SOUTH
AND THEN YOU CAN GET OUT ON
UNIVERSALIZE.
SO THERE&apos;S KIND OF A THERE&apos;S A
DE FACTO CONNECTION THAT EXISTS
NOW.
&gt;&gt; THANKS.
I&apos;M GOING TO GO NEXT AND THEN
IF YOU STILL HAVE THINGS TO SAY
WE CAN CIRCLE TO YOU SO WHAT A
LOT OF ELEMENTARY SCHOOL IS
RIGHT THERE RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; SO I CANNOT IMAGINE A BETTER
CASE FOR PUTTING IN A PROTECTED
BIKE LANE THAN A PROJECT THAT
LEADS DIRECTLY TO THE
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL LIKE IT&apos;S NOT
SAFE.
IT&apos;S NOT LIKE OH IT&apos;S SAFER TO
SCHOOL AND IT&apos;S LIKE PART
OF THE SCHOOL IS RIGHT THERE
AND SO I I DON&apos;T UNDERSTAND WHY
WE&apos;RE PRIORITIZING PRIVATE
VEHICLE STORAGE ON PUBLIC LAND
FOR A HANDFUL OF LANDOWNERS
OVER THE SAFETY OF ALL OF THE
PEOPLE WHO COULD POTENTIALLY BE
TRAVELING THIS ROUTE BY BIKE
INCLUDING HOPEFULLY POTENTIALLY
CHILDREN, LOTS OF CHILDREN
GOING TO AND FROM SCHOOL.
SO MAYBE MOST OF THE TIME
THERE&apos;S NO TRAFFIC BUT EVERY
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL IN THIS TOWN
I PICK UP AND DROP OFF TIME.
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF TRAFFIC AND IF
WE CAN BE REDUCING THOSE CAR
TRIPS AND MAKING IT SAFER FOR
KIDS AND FAMILIES TO BIKE LIKE
THAT&apos;S EVERYTHING THAT WE SAY
WE WANT IN THE CITY.
I THINK IT&apos;S CLEAR FROM THE
RESULTS OF THE MOST RECENT CITY
COUNCIL ELECTION THAT WE HAVE
AT THIS POINT A MANDATE FOR
REALLY AGGRESSIVE SAFETY
IMPROVEMENTS CITYWIDE.
IT&apos;S NOT ONLY IS IT IN OUR
TRANSPORTATION PLAN BUT WE NOW
HAVE CHOSEN LEADERS WHO HAVE
SAID THIS IS WHAT THEY WILL DO
FOR US AND THAT MANDATE IS NOT
EVER GOING TO BE VISIBLE IF YOU
FOCUS JUST ON THE PEOPLE WHO
OWN PROPERTY ADJACENT TO A
SPECIFIC PROJECT LIKE IT&apos;S OH
THERE&apos;S ALWAYS GOING TO BE LESS
SUPPORT AMONG THOSE PEOPLE.
BUT IF WE KEEP MAKING THIS
COMPROMISE EVERY TIME WE WILL
NEVER GET THE KIND OF ROBUST
ALL AGES AND ABILITIES NETWORK
THAT WE SAY WE WANT THAT WE
HAVE VOTED TO FIND THAT WE HAVE
ELECTED THE PEOPLE WHO SAID
THEY&apos;RE GOING TO DO AND IF WE
KEEP DEFERRING TO A HANDFUL
OF PROPERTY OWNERS LIKE WHAT&apos;S
WHAT ARE WE DOING?
THAT&apos;S REALLY MY QUESTION.
AND SO I&apos;M JUST GOING TO LIKE
PUSH REAL HARD RIGHT NOW TO
LIKE TO JUST TAKE AWAY THE
PARKING AND PUT IN THE SAFEST
POSSIBLE BIKE LANES THAT WE
POSSIBLY CAN BECAUSE LIKE OK,
SO THERE&apos;S LIKE A COUPLE
OF TEENAGERS WHO LIVE ON THE
STREET AND WE&apos;RE WE&apos;RE
PRIORITIZING THE THEORETICAL
TEENAGERS OVER LIKE THE VERY
REAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOLERS AND
THEIR KID ON ROUTE TO SCHOOL
LIKE THESE LANDOWNERS BENEFIT
FROM LIVING SO NEAR TO AN
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL EVEN IF THEY
DON&apos;T HAVE KIDS THEY&apos;RE THAT&apos;S
LIKE THEIR PROPERTY VALUES ARE
GOING TO BE EXTRA GOOD AND
MAYBE THAT MEANS THAT THEY HAVE
TO PARK AROUND THE CORNER WHEN
THEY HAVE A PARTY.
I DON&apos;T LIKE OK, I&apos;M GOING TO
STOP NOW BUT THAT&apos;S WHERE I AM
.
I JUST WANT TO SPEAK TO WHAT
YOU SAID BECAUSE THERE WAS A
RESIDENT THAT SAID THE PROPERTY
VALUES WOULD GO DOWN BECAUSE
THERE&apos;S NOT AVAILABLE ON STREET
PARKING AND I HAPPENED I THINK
I WOULD AGREE WITH YOU BECAUSE
I THINK AS FAR AS A STAKE
CONCERN NOT HAVING CARS PARKED
ON YOUR STREET WOULD FEEL SAFER
.
BUT I MEAN IT IS MAKING SPACE
FOR BIKING AND NARROWING THE
ROAD SO THAT THE CARS CAN GO AS
FAST LIKE IT IS SAFER LIKE WE
KNOW THIS WE KNOW IT&apos;S SAFER.
SO ALL RIGHT.
ANYONE ELSE I&apos;M GOING TO STOP
I&apos;M GOING TO OPEN IT UP FOR
ANOTHER ROUND THEN I&apos;M GOING TO
MAYBE SUGGEST A COUPLE
OF OPTIONS FOR MOTION&apos;S OK.
&gt;&gt; THE MOLLY I JUST WANTED TO
POINT OUT THAT THERE IS A
CONNECTION THROUGH THE PARK SO
IT&apos;S ALREADY PART OF A BIGGER
NETWORK THAN IT MIGHT LOOK LIKE
.
OK, SO I HEARD A COUPLE
OF FOLKS I&apos;M NOT THE ONLY ONE
WHO&apos;S FEELING LIKE WE SHOULD BE
TAKING OUT THE PARKING AND
PUTTING IN THE SAFER OPTION.
SO I THINK THIS IS WE CAN DO
THIS RIGHT.
SO BEFORE WE PUT TOGETHER SOME
MOTIONS, I WANT TO FIGURE OUT
WHAT WE&apos;RE MOVING FOR.
WE DON&apos;T WE DON&apos;T TAKE A MOTION
AT ALL, I GUESS.
&gt;&gt; NO, LET&apos;S JUST DO IT BECAUSE
WE DON&apos;T DO IT RIGHT AND WE&apos;RE
NOT GOING TO TAKE A MOTION AT
ALL UNLESS WE WANT TO RECOMMEND
REMOVAL OF STREET PARKING.
WELL, RIGHT.
BECAUSE THE YOU KNOW REALLY
WHAT WE&apos;RE TRYING TO DO IS GET
FEEDBACK ON THE OPTIONS WHICH
YOU&apos;VE GIVEN A ROBUST SENSE
OF FEEDBACK INCLUDING ON THE
STAFF SUGGESTED ALTERNATIVE.
BUT IF YOU&apos;RE GRAVITATING
TOWARDS THE ONE THAT CALLS FOR
THE ELIMINATION PARKING AS WE
MENTIONED, THAT WOULD REQUIRE
COUNCIL ACTION SO IT WOULD BE
ADVISABLE FOR YOU TO TAKE AN
ACTION SPECIFICALLY ON REMOVAL
OF PARKING IF THAT&apos;S WHERE
YOU&apos;RE HEADED.
&gt;&gt; OK, GREAT.
SO WE&apos;RE GOING TO TRY AND SEE
WHAT HAPPENS.
CAN I GET A PEEK?
HOW SPECIFIC DOES THAT
RECOMMENDATION HAVE?
WE SAY THAT WE ARE PRIORITIZING
REMOVAL OF PARKING.
&gt;&gt; WE WOULD RECOMMEND THAT WE
WOULD RECOMMEND THE COUNCIL I
KNOW THIS ONE BECAUSE WE&apos;VE
DONE IT A BUNCH OF TIMES.
WE WOULD RECOMMEND THE COUNCIL
REMOVE PARKING ALONG LIKE IN
THE PROJECT AREA WHERE
NECESSARY TO TO DO THE PLAN
WITH THE PARKING PROTECTED BIKE
LANE OR NOT THE PARKING TICKET
WITH THE PROTECTED BIKE LANE.
SO THAT&apos;S THE WHOLE LENGTH
OF THE SECTION THE PROJECT
AREA.
RIGHT.
SO I WOULD I WOULD ASK FOR A
MOTION TO RECOMMEND THE REMOVAL
OF STREET PARKING IN THE
PROJECT AREA.
THAT&apos;S WHAT I WOULD ASK FOR AND
THAT&apos;S WHAT WE PUT FORWARD.
DOES THAT ANSWER YOUR QUESTION
,JULIE?
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
SO I&apos;M JUST I WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE ADDRESS MEGAN&apos;S CONCERN
ABOUT BEING IN THE DOOR LANE.
I MEAN IT SEEMS LIKE EVEN WITH
A PROTECTED PICTURE IT&apos;S ARE
THE BIKES STILL IN THE DOOR
LANE OR IS THAT I THINK WHAT
WHAT WAS PROPOSED WAS TO
SUGGEST ELIMINATION OF ALL ON
STREET PARKING IN THERE.
I THINK IF WE JUST REMOVE THE
PARKING THEN BOTH SIDES YEAH.
&gt;&gt; WE CAN WE CAN RECOMMEND I
THINK YOU&apos;D ALSO WANT TO DO
LIKE A CLAUSE SAYING WE WANT IT
TO BE REMOVED FOR THE
INSTALLATION OF BECAUSE YOU
WOULDN&apos;T WANT TO HAVE BOTH
PARKING ON BOTH SIDES
OF PARKING
MEND SOMETHING
HIGHER THAN THAT, YEAH.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT, CAN I GET A MOTION
TO RECOMMEND TO CITY COUNCIL
THE REMOVING OF PARKING ON BOTH
SIDES IN THE PROJECT AREA FOR
THE INSTALLATION OF PROTECTED
BIKE LANES?
MEGAN.
DO I SEE A SECOND WHEN YOU&apos;VE
FINISHED BUT WE CAN STILL HEAR
YOU.
&gt;&gt; OK, YEAH THE LIGHTS JUST
WENT OFF SO I&apos;M GOING TO GO RUN
TURN THEM ON REAL QUICK.
&gt;&gt; DO I HAVE A SECOND FOR THAT
MOTION?
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
IT LOOKS LIKE NO.
SO IS THAT WHAT SOMEONE LIKE TO
SUGGEST A DIFFERENT MOTION?
JULIE OH, YOU&apos;RE STILL MUTED.
I&apos;M CONCERNED ABOUT REMOVING
ALL THE PARKING AND I&apos;M TRYING
TO FIGURE OUT IF THERE IS A WAY
TO TO PUT A BIKE BOULEVARD ON
ONE SIDE THAT&apos;S A TWO WAY BIKE
LANE AND KEEP PARKING ON THE
ONE SIDE WOULD BE A COMPROMISE.
&gt;&gt; I KNOW.
I KNOW MOVING AWAY FROM THOSE I
THINK FOR A VARIETY OF REASONS
IT DOESN&apos;T IT WOULDN&apos;T CONNECT
UP WITH IT CAUSES PROBLEMS WHEN
IT&apos;S ONLY FOR A SECTION.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT RAYMOND?
&gt;&gt; YEAH, THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S THE
BIGGEST CHALLENGE.
IT WAS ONE OF THE THINGS I
THINK WE CONTEMPLATED EARLIER
IN THE DESIGN.
IT&apos;S JUST WHEN YOU GET TO CYO
TO THEN TRANSITION ALL THE WAY
ACROSS ESPECIALLY AT SECTION
SEVEN TO SO WIDE BECAUSE YOU
HAVE THE MEAT IN IT WOULD BE A
VERY, VERY BAD TRANSITION.
ALL RIGHT.
SO I THINK A DIFFERENT OPTION
WOULD BE THE REMOVAL OF PARKING
AND FOR WHATEVER ARE WE CALLING
THIS THE STAFF ALTERNATIVE PLAN
WHERE THERE&apos;S SOME SOME PARKING
IS REMOVED BUT NOT ALL THE
PARKING IS REMOVED?
&gt;&gt; IS THAT RIGHT, JANE?
THE CURRENT STAFF RECOMMENDED
PLAN IS HAVING PARKING ON BOTH
SIDES WITH JUST A DESIGNATED
FIVE FOOT BIKE LANE ON EACH
SIDE.
THE THE SCENARIO THAT WOULD
RESULT IN LIMITATIONS ON STREET
PARKING IS IF WE DID IT OR
SEPARATED BIKE LANE THEN WE&apos;D
HAVE TO GET RID OF PARKING AT
LEAST ONE SIDE FOR THE LENGTH
OF THE PROJECT.
&gt;&gt; SO RAYMOND, HOW WOULD YOU
SUGGEST WE WE FRAME THAT IF WE
WANTED TO DO THAT AS A MOTION?
WELL, I THINK KIND OF HOW JANE
JUST DESCRIBED IT WHERE YOU SAY
REMOVE PARKING ON ONE SIDE IN
FAVOR OF AN ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES PROTECTED BIKE LANE.
SO IT&apos;S SIMILAR TO YOUR LAST
MOTION JUST NOT ALL PARKING
JUST ON THE ONE SIDE ARM.
SO I&apos;M GOING TO TRY AGAIN.
CAN I GET A MOTION TO REMOVE
PARKING ON ONE SIDE FOR AN
ADULT FOR A PROTECTED BIKE
LANE?
I SEE THAT AS A MOTION AND PETE
IS SECONDING SO THIS ONE ANY
FURTHER DISCUSSION?
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
WE&apos;RE GOING TO TAKE A VOTE ON
THIS ONE.
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR PHYSICALLY
RAISE YOUR HAND OR SAY YES
, OK,
ALL THOSE OPPOSED PHYSICALLY
RAISE YOUR HAND OR SAY NO.
SO FOREST IS OPPOSED BUT I
DIDN&apos;T KNOW YOU HAD HAD YOUR
HAND RAISED OK AND LARRY, DO
YOU HAVE YOUR MUTED SO IF YOU
JUMPED IN WE DIDN&apos;T HEAR YOU
.
OK, GREAT.
SO THEN WE&apos;RE GOING TO COUNT
THAT AS AN ABSTENTION I THINK
AND THE MOTION PASSES SO WE ARE
GOING TO RECOMMEND THE REMOVAL
SO SO NOT STAFF RECOMMEND
RECOMMENDED PLAN.
WE&apos;RE EDUCATION COMMISSION IS
GOING TO RECOMMEND GOOGLE
STREET PARKING ON ONE SIDE
LARRY.
&gt;&gt; GO AHEAD.
&gt;&gt; IT WAS YES I WAS YES.
OK, THANKS.
WE&apos;RE GOING TO RECOMMEND
REMOVAL OF STREET PARKING ON
ONE SIDE FOR A PROTECTED BIKE
LANE.
I WILL GET RESOLUTION AND
REGISTER FOR THAT PURPOSE AND I
THINK RAYMOND TOLD ME THAT
GOING FORWARD WHAT YOU WOULD
JUST ENDORSE THAT RESOLUTION AS
I HAVEN&apos;T PREPARED THAT YET FOR
TODAY AND I I DON&apos;T KNOW IF WE
WANT TO WAIT UNTIL YOUR NEXT
MEETING FOR YOU TO ENDORSE
SOMETHING.
I THINK I CAN HAVE IT IN
REGISTAR TOMORROW AND JUST WITH
YOUR ENDORSEMENT THAT WE BOTH
AGREE ON WHAT YOU&apos;VE ASKED, I
CAN READ THAT RESOLUTION.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, I THINK THAT THAT&apos;S
FINE.
I DON&apos;T THINK IT NEEDS TO COME
BACK TO US UNLESS THERE&apos;S
SUBSTANTIVE CHANGES BUT IT
SEEMS THERE WON&apos;T BE.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
YEAH, I WOULD AGREE.
I THINK WE CAN WITH YOUR
DIRECTION IS PRETTY CLEAR WE
KNOW WHICH OF THE ALTERNATIVES
YOU&apos;RE RECOMMENDING AND WHAT
THAT ENTAILS.
SO I I THINK WE CAN ENTER THE
RESOLUTION UNTIL TO START
WITHOUT HAVING TO COME BACK.
OK, THANKS EVERYONE.
&gt;&gt; THANKS, JANE.
ALL RIGHT NOW WE&apos;RE DONE
BUSINESS MOVING ON TO THE
VISION ZERO IMPLEMENTATION
COMMITTEE.
THE LAST MEETING WAS ON AUGUST
16TH WHICH WAS RIGHT BEFORE OUR
LAST COMMISSION MEETING.
SO WE DIDN&apos;T HAVE AN
OPPORTUNITY TO REVIEW THE
MATERIALS AND WE&apos;RE GOING TO GO
OVER THEM TONIGHT AND
POTENTIALLY HEAR FROM BRETT AND
GIULIANI IS ON TO THAT
COMMITTEE ABOUT THEIR
IMPRESSIONS.
SO RAYMOND, ARE YOU GOING TO
GET US STARTED?
YEAH, I&apos;LL JUST AS A KIND
OF PAR FOR THE COURSE YOU HAVE
THE ENTIRE PACKET IN THE BACK.
I&apos;LL JUST KIND OF QUICKLY
SCROLL THROUGH IT.
I WON&apos;T GO THROUGH EVERYTHING
SLIDE BY SLIDE BUT JUST KIND
OF GIVE YOU JUST AN UPDATE IN
TERMS OF WHAT HAS BEEN
DISCUSSED AMONG THE VISIONS
AREA IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE
AND FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO ARE A
LITTLE NEWER, THIS TECHNICALLY
IS A SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION.
&gt;&gt; SO YOU KNOW THIS ONE OF THE
REASONS WHY WE ALWAYS WANT TO
KEEP YOU INFORMED AS A BODY AND
YOU KNOW, AS MOLLY MENTIONED,
YOU HAVE TO LIAISE ON BRETT AND
JULIE OUR I THINK CO-CHAIRS AS
WELL.
SO YOU KNOW, WITH GREAT POWER
COMES GREAT RESPONSIBILITY AND
ALL RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; SO I&apos;M GOING TO JUMP RIGHT
INTO THE FIVE YOUR ACTION
ITEMS.
WHAT WE&apos;RE REALLY TRYING TO DO
IS MAKE SURE THAT THE WORK THAT
WE&apos;RE PUTTING OUT THERE IS
ALIGNING WITH WHAT THE PLAN
CALLS FOR.
THERE ARE SOME THINGS WHERE
WE&apos;RE HITTING OUR TARGETS.
THERE&apos;S SOME WHERE WE&apos;RE
EXCEEDING THEM IN THERE
SOMEWHERE WE&apos;RE FALLING SHORT.
SO WE WANT TO BE KIND OF HONEST
ABOUT THAT IN TERMS THE WORK
THAT&apos;S HAPPENING NOW AND THE
WORK THAT&apos;S PROJECTED TO HAPPEN
.
SO THIS IS SLIGHTLY STARTING ON
SLIDE 10 IF YOU WANT TO FOLLOW
ALONG ON YOUR OWN.
SO THE WORK THAT WE&apos;RE
CURRENTLY WORKING ON RIGHT NOW
FOR THE FIVE YEAR ACTION PLAN
WE WANT TO ADDRESS FIFTY ONE
OUT OF THE SEVENTY SIX
STRATEGIES RELATED TO
ENGINEERING ENCOURAGEMENT,
EQUITY, SO FORTH AND SO ON AND
A LOT OF IT HAS TO TIE IN WITH
EXISTING PROGRAMS SUCH AS THE
SIDEWALK GAP CURB RAMPS AND
STREET MAINTENANCE.
WE&apos;VE IDENTIFIED THE NEEDS AND
OPPORTUNITIES AS PART OF THIS
FIVE YEAR ACTION PLAN.
SO AGAIN THE IDEA JUST TO BACK
UP A LITTLE BIT THE FRAMING
THIS FIVE ACTION PLAN WAS WE
HAD THIS VERY BIG PLAN THAT WAS
GREAT AND AMBITIOUS BUT WE
NEEDED TO DIGEST IT AND SO THIS
FIVE YEAR ACTION IS REALLY TO
HELP TO CHART THOSE FIRST FIVE
YEARS OF PROJECTS FOR US.
SO SPELLING OUT WHAT THOSE
NEEDS ARE FOCUSING ON CORRIDORS
AND INTERSECTION DESIGNATION
SIDEWALK GAP FILL CROSSWALK
UPGRADES, BIKE ROUTES AND
BIKING IMPROVEMENTS,
INTERSECTIONS FOR BIKES AND THE
OPPORTUNITY ARE TO COMBINE
STRATEGIES INCORPORATE INTO
EXISTING PROJECTS, ASSESS THE
FEASIBILITY AND USE
OF IMPLEMENTATION AND MAKING
SURE WE TAKE EQUITY INTO
CONSIDERATION AND IF THERE ARE
ANY OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AS
WELL.
WE&apos;RE GETTING FEEDBACK FROM THE
VISIONSTREAM COMPETITION
COMMITTEE ON THAT.
SO OUT OF SOME OF THE ANALYSIS
THAT&apos;S BEEN DONE BASED ON FOR
THOSE OF YOU WHO ARE FAMILIAR
WITH THE PLAN, THERE ARE
SEVERAL DIFFERENT KIND OF KEY
MAPS THAT WE LOOK AT.
ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT THAT
WE REFERENCE REGULARLY ARE THE
TIER ONE IN TIER TWO SAFETY
CORRIDORS AND INTERSECTION AND
THEN WE KIND OF OVERLAY THAT
WITH WHERE THERE ARE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL
AGES AND
ABILITIES BIKE NETWORKS WHERE
THERE ARE IMPROVEMENTS FOR
CROSSWALKS AND SO ON.
AND SO WHAT KIND OF SHAKES OUT
ON TOP FOR BOTH FOCUSED
CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENTS AS WELL
AS BIKE ROUTES AND THEY&apos;RE ONE
IN THE SAME BECAUSE THE TWO
FEED OFF ONE ANOTHER IS
PLYMOUTH ROAD FROM 15 TO TWENTY
THREE PACARD FROM EISENHOWER TO
TWENTY THREE EISENHOWER FROM
ANN ARBOR SELINE TO PACKARD
MILLER FROM UTAH TO MAINE,
PACKARD FROM MAINE TO STADIUM
AND DIVISION FROM HILL TO BEEKS
.
ALL RIGHT SO WHAT THIS HELPS IS
WHAT THIS HELPS DO IS YOU KNOW
IT HELPS ADDRESS THIRTEEN POINT
THREE NINE MILES OF TIER ONE
CORRIDORS TEN POINT FOUR SEVEN
MILES OF TIER TWO CORRIDORS.
THERE IS NO TARGET IN THE PLAN.
SO THAT&apos;S WHY YOU SEE THE NOT
APPLICABLE IN TERMS OF BEFORE
HITTING THE TARGET OR NOT.
BUT THE PLAN OR THIS PROPOSAL
WOULD ADDRESS FOURTEEN FOCUS
INTERSECTIONS IDENTIFIED IN THE
PLAN.
OUR TARGET IS FIFTEEN SO WE&apos;RE
TRACKING PRETTY CLOSE.
WE WOULD PUT IN SIX NEW
CROSSWALK.
THE PLAN WOULD CALL FOR THREE
SO WE&apos;RE EXCEEDING THE TARGET.
THEIR BIKE ROUTES WERE
ADMITTEDLY FALLING SHORT AND I
THINK MANY YOU&apos;RE AWARE THAT
THE PLAN CALLS FOR FIVE MILES
PLUS OF PROTECTED BIKE LANES
EVERY YEAR.
THIS WOULD IMPLEMENT UPWARDS
OF TWENTY THREE MILES BUT THE
TARGET IS SIXTY FIVE.
SO IT IS FALLING SHORT
ADMITTEDLY.
BUT ON THE FLIP SIDE FOUR
INTERSECTIONS WE WOULD ADDRESS
SIXTY SIX INTERSECTIONS WHERE
THE PLAN HAS A TARGET
OF TWENTY.
SO THERE&apos;S A LOT THERE NOW
THERE IS A LITTLE BIT
OF STICKER SHOCK AT THE BOTTOM
YOU CAN SEE THAT ROUGHLY FORTY
THREE MILLION DOLLARS WHICH IS
NOT PROGRAMS IN ANY BUDGET YET
SO THERE&apos;S A LOT OF WORK TO TO
DO IN ORDER TO FIGURE OUT HOW
WE WOULD PAY FOR THAT.
BUT AS I MENTIONED WE DID
CEMENT THE SAFE STREETS FOR
ALL.
GRANT, YOU HEARD A REPORT ON
THAT LAST MONTH SO THAT COULD
GET US PART OF THE WAY IF NOT A
GOOD GOOD PART OF THE WAY THERE
IF WE GET THAT FEDERAL FUNDING
THE NEXT COUPLE OF SLIDES
ACTUALLY GO THROUGH AND KIND
OF CONTEMPLATE SOME OF THE
CONCEPTS THAT MIGHT BE HERE AND
NOW THIS IS JUST A PRELIMINARY
SCAN.
SO WHEN YOU SEE THESE DRAWINGS
I THINK THIS IS THE STARTING
POINT FOR THE DISCUSSION.
DON&apos;T TAKE THIS AS GOSPEL.
RIGHT.
SO THE IDEA IS THE CONSULTANT
HELPED US IDENTIFY WHAT ARE
SOME OF THE IMPROVEMENTS WE CAN
MAKE AS PART OF THESE PROJECTS
.
AND SO FOR EXAMPLE, ON PLYMOUTH
THEY SUGGEST EXTENDING RAISED
MEDIAN INSTALLING OVERHEAD
RECTANGULAR RAPID FLASHING
BEACON SIGNS, MAYBE CLOSING
SOME TURN LANES, RELOCATING
SIDEWALKS, MAYBE EVEN LOOKING
AT A TWO WAY CYCLE TRACK ALONG
.
PLYMOUTH&apos;S SO THOSE ARE SOME
OF THE OPPORTUNITIES THERE,
MAYBE EVEN SOME CROSSWALKS AND
OTHER ELEMENTS AS WELL FOR
MILLER THE IDEA WOULD BE TO
LOOK SOME OF THOSE EXISTING
CROSSWALKS AND HOW CAN WE MAKE
UPGRADES WHERE WE JUST HAVE
STATIC SIGNAGE?
MAYBE WE CAN UPGRADE THOSE TWO
RECTANGULAR RAPID FLASHING
BEACONS.
WE CAN ALSO LOOK AT BETTER BIKE
FACILITIES, BIKE LANES WITH
GREEN PAVEMENT MARKING MAKE
SURE THAT THERE&apos;S ADEQUATE
SHERU IF THERE ARE SHARED
SPACES IMPROVED CROSSWALK
MARKINGS AND THINGS OF THAT
NATURE.
AND SO THOSE ARE JUST A COUPLE
OF EXAMPLES PLAN TRACKING AND
REPORTING.
SO WHAT WE WANT TO TRY TO DO IS
START TO DEVELOP AN ANNUAL
REPORT THAT WE REPORT OUT TO
YOU ALL AS WELL AS CITY COUNCIL
POST ON OUR WEBSITE TO SHOW THE
PROGRESS THAT WE&apos;RE MAKING YEAR
OVER YEAR AND HOW WELL THAT&apos;S
ALIGNING WITH THE PLANS OF THE
OR THE GOALS OF THE PLAN.
SO THERE ARE SEVERAL METRICS A
NUMBER OF PEOPLE KILLED OR
SERIOUSLY INJURED, PERCENT
OF SERIOUS INJURIES AND
FATALITIES OF PEOPLE WALKING
AND BIKING, PERCENT OF SERIOUS
INJURIES AND FATALITIES RELATED
IS A NUMBER OF SAFETY
IMPROVEMENTS INSTALLED ON FOCUS
CORRIDORS AND INTERSECTIONS PER
YEAR.
WE WOULD TRY TO IDENTIFY THOSE
SORRY MY MOUTH IS OFF.
&gt;&gt; WE THANK YOU SO
AGAIN, I
PROBABLY WON&apos;T READ THROUGH ALL
OF US WHAT&apos;S IN YOUR PACKET BUT
THERE ARE METRICS FOR THE LAST
METRIC I SPOKE WHO IS RELATED
TO SAFETY?
THERE ARE ALSO METRICS RELATED
TO MOBILITY THAN THERE IS
METRICS RELATED TO
ACCESSIBILITY FOR ALL AND
HEALTHY PEOPLE SUSTAINABLE
PLACES.
THESE ARE THE PILLARS OF THE
PLAN IF YOU&apos;RE FAMILIAR WITH
IT.
SO JUST AS A SAMPLING FOR EACH
ONE OF THOSE FOR MOBILITY WE
TALK ABOUT THINGS OF A PERCENT
OF POPULATION WITHIN A QUARTER
MILE OF AN ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES BIKE NETWORK FOR
EXAMPLE UNDER ACCESSIBILITY FOR
ALL WE TALK ABOUT WHAT ARE THE
TRANSPORTATION COSTS AS A
PERCENT OF HOUSEHOLD INCOME AND
HOW MANY JOBS ARE ACCESSIBLE
VIA DIFFERENT MODES
OF TRANSPORTATION UNDER HEALTHY
PEOPLE AND SUSTAINABLE PLACES
REALLY TRACKING WHAT VEHICLE
MILES TRAVELED IS PER DAY AND
SEEING IF THAT IS DECREASING
OVER TIME AND HOW YOU KNOW HOW
MUCH OF THE POPULATION IS
WITHIN A TWENTY MINUTE
NEIGHBORHOOD AND IN THE PLAN
THE IDEA IS THAT YOU CAN GET TO
ALL OF YOUR BASIC NEEDS WITHIN
A TWENTY MINUTE WALK OF YOUR
HOME.
SO SHOPPING ENTERTAIN IN
RESTAURANTS ANY OF THOSE THINGS
.
AND THEN THE LAST PILLAR OF THE
PLAN IS REGIONAL CONNECTIVITY.
SO REALLY TRACKING THE PERCENT
OF COMMUTERS THAT ARE COMING IN
AND GO PLACES AND THINGS LIKE
THAT IF WE CAN EXPAND THAT
PROGRAM.
&gt;&gt; SO THEN AGAIN IT GOES DOWN A
COUPLE OF LAYERS MORE INTO THE
WEEDS IN TERMS OF HOW WE&apos;RE
GOING TO TRACK THE TARGETS, THE
STRATEGIES AND HOW WE CAN
QUANTIFY BOTH IN TERMS OF THE
FIVE YEAR TARGET AND THE
EFFORTS THAT ARE UNDERWAY
VERSUS THOSE THAT ARE PROGRAMED
NEXT.
I&apos;M GOING TO TALK ABOUT THE
SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
SO AGAIN, YOU MAY RECALL THAT
THIS WORK SAM SCHWARTZ IS DOING
FOR US WAS THEY HAD THREE MAIN
THINGS THAT THEY WERE WORKING
ON ARE WORKING ON THESE QUICK
BUILD YEAR ONE PROJECTS WHICH
WE&apos;RE HOPEFULLY GOING TO GET IN
THE GROUND ANY DAY NOW.
THEN THERE WAS THIS FIVE YEAR
ACTION PLAN THAT I JUST
DISCUSSED AND THEN WE TALK
ABOUT THE SPEED MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM WHICH WE&apos;VE PREVIOUSLY
CALLED MAJOR STREETS TRAFFIC
CALMING BUT WE REALLY WANT TO
FOCUS ON SPEED MANAGEMENT.
SO AGAIN, THIS IS STILL IN
DEVELOPMENT SO WE WANT TO TRY
TO KEEP YOU UP TO SPEED IN
TERMS OF WHAT&apos;S HAPPENING.
BUT THE IDEA IS WE&apos;RE TRYING TO
COME UP WITH A TOOL BOX AND
WHERE THOSE DIFFERENT TOOLS CAN
BE APPLIED BASED ON THE TYPE
OF ROADWAY AND THE IDEA IS WE
ALSO WANT TO EDUCATE AND
EMPOWER RESIDENTS TO BE PART
OF THE PROCESS SO THAT THEY CAN
HELP INFLUENCE THE OUTCOME
SIMILAR TO WHAT WE&apos;RE DOING
WITH THE SIDEWALK GAP PRIOR
CAUSATION.
SO WE&apos;RE LOOKING AT STREETS BY
CHARACTER TYPE.
WE&apos;RE LOOKING AT BEST PRACTICES
ACROSS THE INDUSTRY AND THEN
WE&apos;RE MATCHING KIND OF THOSE
BEST PRACTICES WITH OUR TYPES
OF STREETS IN ORDER TO CONTROL
SPEEDS SO SIMILAR TO WHAT
YOU&apos;RE FAMILIAR WITH IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC CALMING
PROGRAM, WE&apos;RE KIND OF CLUMPING
THESE DIFFERENT, YOU KNOW,
AREAS HORIZONTAL DEFLECTION
MEANS THINGS THAT YOU DRIVE
AROUND A VERTICAL DEFLECTION.
NUMBER THREE, THERE ARE THINGS
THAT YOU DRIVE OVER.
THERE&apos;S CROSS SECTION
MODIFICATIONS.
SO THE IDEA OF NARROWING LANES
AND THEN TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICES SO EVERYTHING FROM
ROUNDABOUTS TO SIGNALS THINGS
OF THAT NATURE AND THEN WE&apos;RE
LOOKING AT SEVERAL DIFFERENT
CRITERIA AS WELL SPEED LIMITS
VOLUMES, INTERSECTION CONTROL,
HOW WE ACCOMMODATE EMERGENCY
VEHICLES ARE SOME OF THE THINGS
THAT GO INTO THE CONSIDERATION.
&gt;&gt; I WON&apos;T GO THROUGH ALL
OF THESE AND A LOT OF DETAIL.
I THINK A LOT OF THESE CONCEPTS
WILL BE FAMILIAR TO MANY OF YOU
BECAUSE THEY&apos;RE VERY SIMILAR TO
WHAT WE USE IN OUR NEIGHBORHOOD
TRAFFIC COMING PROGRAM BUT
THEY&apos;RE MODIFIED SOMEWHAT TO
ACCOMMODATE BIGGER STREETS,
MAJOR STREETS.
SO CHICANES THE IDEA IS THAT
THINGS THAT YOU KIND OF DRIVE
AROUND KIND OF BREAKS A
STRAIGHT PATH ON THE ROADWAY,
REALIGNED INTERSECTIONS,
SIMILAR SORT OF CONCEPT TRAFFIC
CIRCLES AGAIN SIMILAR CONCEPT.
THINK OF IT AS A COMPACT URBAN
ROUNDABOUT THINGS THAT YOU
DRIVE AROUND AND THEN
ROUNDABOUTS ARE INCLUDED AS
WELL LANE REDUCTIONS.
SO YOU SOMETIMES CALL THESE
ROAD DIETZE ON-STREET PARKING
HAD A LOT OF DISCUSSION ABOUT
THAT BUT THERE ARE SOME
BENEFITS OF ON STREET PARKING
ESPECIALLY AS IT RELATES TO
TRAFFIC COMING AND GETTING CARS
TO SLOW DOWN BECAUSE IT GIVES
THAT SORT OF IDEA OF FRICTION
AND THE PUBLIC RIGHT WAY BIKE
LANE AND PROTECTED BIKE LANES
WHICH I KNOW MOST OF THIS GROUP
IS VERY FAMILIAR WITH LANE
NARROWING A CONCEPT THAT WE&apos;RE
DOING QUITE A BIT OF YOU KNOW,
A LOT OUR LANES EVEN HEARD JANE
SPEAK TO IT EARLIER TODAY ABOUT
USING TEN FOOT TRAVEL LANES AS
OPPOSED TO ELEVEN OR TWELVE OR
GREATER AND WHAT&apos;S OUT THERE
NOW ON SEVEN CURVE EXTENSIONS
OR SOMETIMES CALLED BUMP OUTS?
YOU KNOW, WE USE THESE QUITE A
BIT BUT THEY PROVIDE AGAIN THAT
KIND OF TRAFFIC ELEMENT.
A CHOKER IS ALMOST LIKE A BUMP
BUT THERE&apos;S ONE ON EACH SIDE SO
YOU REALLY JUST KIND OF JUST
CHOKE ON THE STREET DOWN AND
MAKE IT COME THAT RAISED
MEDIANS.
SO JUST THE IDEA THAT WE CAN
HAVE INSTEAD OF JUST A PAINTED
OUT CENTER LANE WE CAN ACTUALLY
DO SOME RACE COMEDIANS IN AREAS
PEDESTRIAN REFUGE ISLANDS AGAIN
THIS IDEA OF CROSSING THE CROSS
WALK THROUGH AN ISLAND SO THAT
PEDESTRIANS HAVE MIDPOINT THAT
THEY CAN STAY SAFELY IF THEY
NEED TO STREET TREES AND OTHER
STREET FURNITURE OR OTHER
OPPORTUNITIES FOR TRAFFIC
CALMING SPEED HUMPS.
&gt;&gt; SO NOW WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT
SOME OF THESE VERTICAL ELEMENTS
.
WE ARE ACTUALLY EXPLORING THIS
IDEA OF VERTICAL ELEMENTS
ON,
YOU KNOW, MAJOR STREETS SO THE
NEXT SERIES OF THESE WILL BE
THINGS YOU DRIVE ON TOP OF .
SO SPEED SPEED CUSHIONS SO YOU
MIGHT SAY WELL WHAT&apos;S WITH THIS
DESIGN WITH SPEED CUSHIONS?
WHY ARE THERE GAPS IN THE
SPEED?
THE IDEA IS TO ALLOW EMERGENCY
VEHICLES TO MORE READILY GET
THROUGH THE INTERSECTION.
THIS THE BREAK BETWEEN THE HUMP
IS ALIGNED WITH THE WHEEL OF A
FIRE ENGINE, FOR EXAMPLE, SPEED
TABLES THESE ARE JUST ELONGATED
SPEED HUMPS SOMETIMES PREFERRED
BY EMERGENCY RESPONDERS BECAUSE
THEY ARE ABLE TO APPROACH THOSE
A LITTLE BIT MORE TO THEIR
LIKING AND THEY DON&apos;T HAVE TO
BOTTOM OUT ON ON RAISED
INTERSECTIONS.
WE&apos;VE BEEN USING THESE FOR
TRAFFIC CALMING ON THE
NEIGHBORHOODS AS WELL AS THE
NAME IMPLIES IT&apos;S JUST KIND A
VERY LARGE TABLE OR SPEED HUMP
THAT IS THE ENTIRETY OF THE
INTERSECTION IN CENTER LINE
PUTTING SOME VERTICAL ELEMENTS
AT THE INTERSECTION TO KEEP
CARS FROM CUTTING THE CORNER,
RAISE CROSSWALKS, SPEED
FEEDBACK, SCIENCE SOME OF WHICH
WE HAVE IN TOWN PAVEMENT
LEGENDS.
&gt;&gt; WE DO NOT CURRENTLY HAVE
THESE BUT IF YOU&apos;VE DRIVEN ON
SOME INTERSTATES IN MICHIGAN
YOU&apos;VE SEEN AND THIS IS WHERE
YOU ACTUALLY PAINT ON THE
PAVEMENT THINGS SUCH AS THE
POSTED SPEED LIMIT TO REALLY
DRAW ATTENTION FOR THE MOTORIST
TO WHAT THE DRIVERS WHAT THEY
SHOULD BE DRIVING AND THEN
THERE ARE OPPORTUNITIES FOR
KIND OF PLACEMAKING COMMUNITY
BUILDING THROUGH STREET ART.
WHAT ARE SOME OPPORTUNITIES
THAT WE COULD JUST USE PAINT TO
MANAGE SPEED?
THERE ARE SOME OPPORTUNITIES TO
USE DIFFERENT PAVEMENT MATERIAL
TYPES WHICH COULD HAVE A
CALMING EFFECT AS WELL.
AND SO THAT&apos;S JUST KIND OF THE
TOOLBOX THAT WE&apos;RE WORKING WITH
RIGHT NOW.
IT&apos;S STILL UNDER DEVELOPMENT.
WE&apos;RE GOING TO START GETTING
THESE IDEAS IN OCTOBER AND IS
WORKING WITH A CONSULTANT RIGHT
NOW TO DEVELOP A SERIES
OF ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR
THE PUBLIC.
AS SOON AS THOSE DATES ARE
NAILED DOWN WE&apos;LL BE SURE TO
SHARE THOSE WITH YOU AND SO
THAT YOU CAN ENGAGE IN A
PROCESS.
ALL RIGHT.
AND THAT CONCLUDES THE
PRESENTATION I WANTED TO GIVE.
THERE WAS A SMALL PRESENTATION
BY THE MICHIGAN FITNESS
FOUNDATION.
I DON&apos;T HAVE THAT READY TO GO
BUT I CAN POINT YOU TO IT.
&gt;&gt; IT IS I THINK ON THE CITY
WEBSITE IF YOU NEED ACCESS TO
IT AND MAYBE I&apos;LL TURN IT OVER
TO BRITAIN, JULIE, TO SEE IF
THEY HAVE ANY ADDITIONAL
FEEDBACK OR IMPRESSIONS ON HOW
THINGS ARE GOING WITH THE
VISIONSTREAM COMPETITION
COMMITTEE.
I&apos;LL JUST SAY THAT IT&apos;S A FUN
COMMITTEE TO BE ON AND IT&apos;S
EXCITING TO SEE THE QUICK
BUILD&apos;S HAPPENING.
I&apos;M REALLY EXCITED ABOUT THE
MAJOR STREET COMING AND THAT
ISN&apos;T AS FAR ALONG AND WE&apos;VE
GOT THIS TOOLBOX WHERE IT&apos;S
KIND OF INTERESTING TO THINK
ABOUT THE DIFFERENT IDEAS BUT
NO, NOTHING LIKE A PLAN OR
ANYTHING OUTSIDE ANXIOUS TO SEE
THAT HAPPEN.
MAYBE BY THE END OF THE YEAR.
RAYMON MAYBE.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
AND SO TO ELABORATE ON WHAT
JULIE&apos;S GETTING OUT OF THE
CONSOLE RIGHT NOW IS WORKING
WITH US TO KIND OF DEVELOP
SIMILAR IF YOU&apos;RE FAMILIAR WITH
OUR SIDEWALK PRIORITIZATION
PROCESS, WHAT WE DO IS WE LOOK
AT A WHOLE BUNCH OF DIFFERENT
DATA ELEMENTS TO DETERMINE
WHERE THE HIGHEST RANKED GAP IS
.
BUT THEN THERE&apos;S ALSO AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR THE PUBLIC TO
INFLUENCE THAT SCORING CRITERIA
IF THEY PETITION FOR IT.
SO WE&apos;RE THINKING OF A SIMILAR
APPROACH.
SO WE WANT TO BE DATA DRIVEN.
WE WANT TO BE ADDRESSING AREAS
THAT HAVE THE BIGGEST PROBLEM
RELATED TO CRASHES AND SPEEDS
AND THINGS OF THAT NATURE.
SO WE WANT THAT TO BE THERE.
BUT THEN WE ALSO WANT THE
PUBLIC TO BE ABLE TO WEIGH IN
AS WELL.
SO AND TO JULIE&apos;S POINT, THAT&apos;S
EXACTLY THE SORT OF STUFF WE&apos;RE
GOING TO GET PUBLICLY THROUGH
THESE ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITY IN
OCTOBER HOPEFULLY BY THE END
OF THE YEAR.
I KNOW THE CONSULTANT WANTS TO
BE DONE BY THE END OF THE YEAR.
I THINK IT&apos;S REALLY GOING TO BE
A FUNCTION OF HOW MUCH PUBLIC
INPUT WE GET AND WHAT THAT
INPUT INPUT IS TO DETERMINE IF
WE&apos;RE GETTING IT RIGHT OR IF WE
NEED TO GO BACK TO THE DRAWING
BOARD.
&gt;&gt; SO SO STAY TUNED IN THAT
SPACE IN TERMS OF TIMELINE ALSO
DO YOU REMEMBER WHEN THE
COMMITTEE AND THE CONSULTANTS
ARE COMING BACK TO REPORT TO
THIS TO THE FULL TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION?
I DON&apos;T RECALL TOP OF MY HEAD
BUT I&apos;LL HAVE AN ANSWER AT THE
NEXT MEETING.
THANKS TO EVERYTHING TO TO ADD
SO I THINK YOU GUYS COVERED IT
.
I CAN&apos;T WAIT TO SEE WHAT THE
PUBLIC THINKS AND WHAT THE REST
OF THE COMMISSION THINKS WHEN
WE COME BACK.
I THINK IT&apos;S A REALLY EXCITING
AWESOME THANK YOU ALL FOR THAT.
THAT&apos;S GREAT.
I THINK WE DO WE GOT THROUGH
THE FIRST HALF THE AGENDA
REALLY FAST.
I THINK WE HAVE A LITTLE TIME
FOR QUESTIONS AND COMMENTS.
ALL RIGHT.
I HAVE A QUESTION WHICH IS
ABOUT THE PACARD.
SO THERE&apos;S LIKE THE FIVE
PRIORITY CORRIDORS AND IF I&apos;M
UNDERSTANDING IT CORRECTLY,
IT&apos;S LIKE THE TOP THIRD
OF PACARD AND THE BOTTOM THIRD
OF PACARD AND NOT THE MIDDLE
WHERE IT GETS REALLY WIDE AND
FLAT AND FAST.
AND I&apos;M CURIOUS ABOUT THAT
DECISION.
IT WAS JUST TO SPITE YOU,
MOLLY.
&gt;&gt; NO, I&apos;M KIDDING.
I&apos;M KIDDING.
I&apos;D HAVE TO LOOK AT MY MY GUESS
IS IT&apos;S PROBABLY A FUNCTION
OF THE CRASH PATTERN THAT&apos;S OUT
THERE AND IT&apos;S JUST LOOKING AT
THE HISTORICAL TRENDS.
BUT I&apos;M SPECULATING ON SO LET
ME LET ME LOOK INTO THAT AND
GET BACK TO YOU ON THAT AS
WELL.
THAT MEMORY THOUGH IS MOTIVATED
BY CRASH DATA.
YEAH, THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S HELPFUL.
I JUST I EXPERIENCING THAT
QUARTER IN EVERY POSSIBLE MODE
I IT&apos;S HARD TO GO THE SPEED
LIMIT AS A DRIVER.
YOU JUST IT&apos;S SO WIDE AND EMPTY
AND FAST AND THAT MAKES IT MUCH
MORE HOSTILE FOR EVERYONE ELSE
SO AND ALSO THEN IF YOU JUST
MAKE IT ALL ON PAPER THEN YOU
CAN PUT ANOTHER QUARTER IN
THERE LIKE SO YOU KNOW SORRY
I&apos;M NOT GOING TO EXPLAIN
QUARTERS TO YOU RIGHT NOW.
GIVE ME A MINUTE.
SO THAT WAS MY QUESTION.
OTHER QUESTIONS AND COMMENTS
OTHER QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS.
ALL RIGHT.
COOL.
WELL WE&apos;LL LOOK FORWARD TO
SEEING IT LIKE LIKE A PART OF A
ROAD LIKE A SECTION OF ROAD.
SO WHY WOULD YOU GO COOL?
I THINK WE&apos;RE GOOD.
SOUNDS LIKE WE&apos;RE GOOD.
AWESOME.
I&apos;M GOING TO MOVE ON TO THE
NEXT ITEM OF DISCUSSION WHICH
IS ABOUT PROTECTED ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION DISCUSSIONS.
SO THIS TITLE IS LIKE NOT
TOTALLY DESCRIPTIVE OF WHAT
THIS IS ABOUT BUT BASICALLY AND
RAYMOND CORRECT ME IF I&apos;M LIKE
THIS IS NOT WHAT WE&apos;RE TALKING
ABOUT BUT THE IDEA HERE IS THAT
WE ARE STARTING WE&apos;VE ALL
NOTICED THAT WE&apos;RE STARTING TO
BUMP INTO THESE ISSUES WHERE
WE&apos;VE SET CERTAIN PRIORITIES
AROUND LIKE PROTECTED BIKE
LANES ESPECIALLY AND WE&apos;RE NOT
ABLE TO INSTALL BECAUSE
OF VARIOUS BARRIERS AROUND
BUDGET AND LIKE WHO&apos;S
RESPONSIBLE FOR WHAT AND AND
CAN I JUST EXPLAIN THIS?
IS THAT OK?
IS IT OK OR I THINK THIS IS
YOUR ITEM SO HOWEVER YOU WANT
TO STEER IT CERTAINLY
EXPLAINING IT AS IT&apos;S BEEN
EXPLAINED TO ME SO LIKE FOR
EXAMPLE, THE REASON WE CAN&apos;T
HAVE PROTECTED WE HAVE BEEN
ABLE TO HAVE PROTECTED BIKE
LANES ON EACH SIDE AS OPPOSED
TO THE WIDER TWO WAY BICYCLE
BOULEVARD&apos;S IS THAT WE NEED
SMALLER SWEEPERS AND SNOWPLOWS
AND THE AND THERE&apos;S BEEN SORT
OF LIKE A SERIES OF REASONS WHY
WE COULDN&apos;T GET THEM.
SO THERE WERE BUDGET ISSUES AND
WE&apos;VE BUDGETED FOR IT AND THEN
THERE WERE SUPPLY CHAIN ISSUES
AND NOW THERE&apos;S ALSO CONCERNS
ABOUT WE CAN&apos;T BUY A PIECE
OF EQUIPMENT WITHOUT HAVING A
PLAN FOR ITS MAINTENANCE AND
REPLACEMENT AND THE WAY OUR
BUDGET CURRENTLY WORKS
TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS ARE ONE
OFF LIKE WE BUILD THE THING AND
THEN WE&apos;RE DONE AND OPERATIONS
IS RESPONSIBLE FOR ONGOING
SUPPORT OF THESE THINGS AND
THESE NEW KINDS OF EQUIPMENT
THAT WE NEED FOR FOR THESE BIKE
LANES.
IT&apos;S UNCLEAR WHERE THEY GO AND
STAFF HAS BEEN TRYING TO WORK
THIS OUT AND I&apos;M IMPATIENT
OBVIOUSLY AND IT FEELS LIKE
IT&apos;S TIME TO ASK CITY COUNCIL
TO DO SOMETHING TO HELP STAFF
LIKE MAKE A DETERMINATION.
THIS IS WHERE IT GOES.
THIS IS WHERE THE MONEY COMES
FROM.
HOW TOUGH LIKE THIS IS HOW WE
DO THIS AND THE TIMING TO DO
THIS IS GREAT BECAUSE WE&apos;RE
ENTERING BUDGET TIME BUT WE&apos;RE
NOT THERE YET SO IT&apos;S EARLY
ENOUGH THAT WE CAN MAKE A
SUGGESTION.
SO EVERY YEAR WE MAKE
RECOMMENDATIONS MUCH CLOSER TO
THE BUDGET ABOUT HOW WE THINK
THEY SHOULD SPEND THEIR MONEY.
BUT THIS IS ABOUT LIKE THIS IS
AGAIN IT&apos;S LIKE THIS PROCESS
THING AND SO THERE WERE TWO SO
THAT&apos;S LIKE THE ONE PIECE WAS
LIKE WE NEED TO ASK CITY
COUNCIL TO HELP FIGURE THIS OUT
SO WE CAN GET SOME PROTECTED
BIKE LANES AND THEN THERE&apos;S
ALSO THIS OTHER THING WHICH
MAYBE WE SHOULD SAY BECAUSE I
THINK IT WAS PARTLY A THING
THAT COUNCIL MEMBER BRINGS US
BRIGGS&apos;S WHEN TALKING ABOUT
WHICH IS ABOUT INCORPORATING
IMPROVEMENTS TRAFFIC CALMING
NEW FACILITIES INTO EVERY
RESURFACING PROJECT BY DEFAULT
AND AGAIN THAT WOULD MEAN
BUDGETING SLIGHTLY DIFFERENTLY
BECAUSE WE&apos;RE BUILDING IT INTO
JUST ALL BECAUSE RIGHT NOW
TRANSPORTATION IS ITS OWN
LITTLE BUCKET OF MONEY AND THIS
WOULD MEAN THAT IT&apos;S IN EVERY
ROAD PROJECT THAT WE DO
POTENTIALLY SO THESE ARE MY
SWIRLY IDEAS.
RAYMOND, I DON&apos;T KNOW IF YOU
WANT TO GIVE A LITTLE BIT MORE
FORMAL STRUCTURE TO WHAT WE
MIGHT TALK ABOUT TONIGHT AND
WHAT ACTION WE MIGHT EVENTUALLY
TAKE.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, MOLLY, YOU
A FANTASTIC
JOB FRAMING IT AND I&apos;LL JUST
GIVE SOME ADDITIONAL CONTEXT
FOR EXAMPLE TO IT SO A LOT
OF OUR EXISTING BIKE NETWORK
ARE JUST A SINGLE STRIPE ON THE
ROAD AND FOR PLOWING AND
SWEEPING WHAT PUBLIC WORKS DOES
IS THEY JUST TAKEAR
EQUIPMENT AND RUN FROM CURB TO
CURB SO THEY ARE SWEEPING AND
PLOWING THE BIKE LANE AS THEY
SWEEP AND PLOW THE ROAD AND SO
THAT&apos;S WORKED.
YOU KNOW, AND WE WON&apos;T GO DOWN
A RABBIT HOLE ABOUT WHETHER
THAT HAS BEEN DONE WELL OR EVEN
IF THOSE FACILITIES ARE
ADEQUATE OR NOT.
BUT THAT WAS OUR PRACTICE.
BUT NOW THAT WE HAVE THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN WHICH CALLS
FOR AN ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
NETWORK WHICH LARGELY LEANS
TOWARDS PROTECTED BIKE LANES
WITH VERTICAL SEPARATION FROM
MOVING VEHICLES WE HAVE THE
FACILITIES DOWNTOWN THAT DAY IS
PUT IN THE CYCLE TRACKS THE TWO
CYCLE TRACKS ON DIVISION
WILLIAM FIRST AND THEN THERE&apos;S
ONE GOING IN AS WE SPEAK ON
MILLER CATHERINE, THE REASON
WHY THOSE WORK OR EXISTING
MAINTENANCE IS BECAUSE THEY ARE
THE WIDTH OF A ROADWAY, A LANE
OF TRAFFIC BECAUSE YOU HAVE TWO
FIVE FOOT BIKE SIDE BY SIDE AND
THEN THE CURVE AND SO THEY CAN
RUN A FULL SIZED PLOW OR A FULL
SIZED SWEEPER DOWN THOSE.
BUT ACKNOWLEDGING THAT WE CAN&apos;T
PUT IN CYCLE TRACKS EVERYWHERE
IN PART JUST BECAUSE OF CERTAIN
CONSTRAINT ROADWAY
CONFIGURATION AND THEN THERE
CERTAIN TIMES WHERE MAYBE A
CYCLE TRACK IS LESS DESIRABLE
THAN PERHAPS A PROTECTED SINGLE
LANE BIKE LANE WITH VERTICAL
SEPARATION THAT WOULD MEAN WE
WOULD HAVE A FIVE FOOT ISH BIKE
LANE WITH THE BUFFER PROTECTED
ELEMENT.
BUT IN ORDER TO GET A SWEEPER
THERE YOU COULDN&apos;T GET A FULL
SIZE SWEEPER.
SO TRYING TO FIND THE PIECE
OF EQUIPMENT THAT BOTH CAN
SERVE THOSE PURPOSES AS WELL AS
THE ELECTRIC THE CITY HAS A
GREEN FLEET POLICY NOW AS PART
OF OUR SUSTAINABILITY FRAMEWORK
,YOU KNOW IT&apos;S HARD TO PROCURE
THOSE VEHICLES AND TO OPERATE
THEM TO CHARGE THEM AND DO ALL
OF THOSE.
NOW YOU KNOW THAT&apos;S NOT OUR
DEPARTMENT.
THAT&apos;S A DIFFERENT DEPARTMENT
THAT DOES THAT.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME I KIND
OF FEEL THEIR PAIN A LITTLE
BIT.
THEY DON&apos;T HAVE THE RESOURCES
TO BE ABLE TO DO THAT WORK
RIGHT NOW.
SO IF I&apos;M UNDERSTANDING
CORRECTLY THE IDEA HERE AS PART
OF THIS DISCUSSION IS TO
ELEVATE THE ISSUE AND FOR THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION TO
KIND OF PUT THEIR WEIGHT BEHIND
MAKING THIS A PRIORITY SO THAT
WE CAN CAN KIND OF KIND OF TRY
TO UNJAM IT FROM WHERE IT IS
RIGHT NOW.
DID THAT HELP MOLLY?
YES, I YOU AND I HAVE BEEN
TALKING ABOUT THIS SO LONG THAT
I FORGET WHAT EVERYONE HAS
HEARD AND NOT HEARD ABOUT THEIR
PROTECTED CYCLING CHALLENGES.
SO QUESTIONS GOT COMMENTS,
GRIEVANCES.
COOL.
I&apos;M SAYING THUMBS THUMBS UP
FROM JULIE.
THANKS, PETE.
SO WHAT I GUESS IT&apos;S NOT CLEAR
TO ME WHAT MECHANISM WE WOULD
USE TO TO COMPEL HER TO URGE
CITY COUNCIL TO DO SOMETHING
ABOUT IT.
I CAN STILL PROCESS.
YEAH.
SO THIS ISN&apos;T QUITE SOMETHING
WE&apos;VE DONE BEFORE.
OFTEN WE&apos;RE ACTING ON THINGS
THE COUNCIL HAS REFERRED TO US.
WE HAVE SOMETIMES IN THE PAST
IDENTIFIED THINGS THAT WE THINK
ARE IMPORTANT WHERE WE COME UP
WITH OUR OWN RESOLUTION AND
PASS IT AND IT GETS BROUGHT TO
COUNCIL AND WE ASK OUR COUNCIL
REPRESENTATIVES SO IN THIS CASE
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS TO BRING
IT TO COUNCIL AND MAYBE WORK ON
HAVING A COUNCIL RESOLUTION OR
MAKING SURE SOMETHING GETS PUT
INTO THE BUDGET DEPENDENT
BUDGET PROPOSAL DEPENDING ON
WHAT IT IS.
SO IN THIS CASE TONIGHT WE JUST
GOING TO TALK ABOUT IT AND MAKE
IT CLEAR WHAT WE&apos;RE TALKING
ABOUT AND THEN POTENTIALLY AT
OUR NEXT MEETING WE COULD BRING
A RESOLUTION OR A COUPLE
OF RESOLUTIONS DEPENDING ON HOW
WE WANT TO ADDRESS THIS THAT
WOULD BE ASKING CITY COUNCIL TO
SAY PLEASE FIGURE THIS OUT ON
AN OPERATION LIKE IT&apos;S TIME TO
GET TO THE OPERATIONS LEVEL
DIRECT TO THE DIRECTOR, THE
CITY ADMINISTRATOR TO DO X, Y,
Z THING ESPECIALLY THE
UNTANGLING AROUND
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE AND THE
SUFFICIENT RESOURCES FOR THE
PROTECTED MAINTENANCE ISSUE AND
WE WOULD DISCUSS IT AND VOTE ON
IT POTENTIALLY.
AND IF WE PASSED SOMETHING LIKE
THIS IT WOULD THEN GO TO
COUNCIL AND BEYOND THAT IT&apos;S
KIND OF OUT OF OUR HANDS
BECAUSE WE DON&apos;T WE CAN&apos;T
ACTUALLY WE CAN ONLY RECOMMEND
YOU CAN ONLY ADVISE AND
RECOMMEND BUT WE WOULD BE
MAKING A RECOMMENDATION TO
COUNCIL.
&gt;&gt; BRETT IS WONDERING IF
BRENDON COULD MAYBE BETTER
SCOPE FOR US AT THE ROADBLOCKS
TO THIS PIECE OF EQUIPMENT OR
THESE PIECES OF EQUIPMENT AS
BEING PART OF THE GREEN FLEET
PROGRAM?
IS IT THAT THEY DON&apos;T EXIST IN
A BIT OF A BATTERY ELECTRIC
VEHICLE FORMAT OR MAYBE THERE&apos;S
ONLY ONE OPTION.
YOU KNOW IT&apos;S LIKE A MILLION
VERSUS ORDER OF MAGNITUDE
DIFFERENCE IN COST THAT I JUST
I KNOW THE CITY REGULARLY BUYS
ON VEHICLES NOW THAT AND THIS
IS SUCH A BIG ROADBLOCK AND
IT&apos;S SUCH A KEY ENABLING THING
THAT COULD REALLY REDUCE
VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED FOR
EXAMPLE.
CAN WE GET AROUND THAT FOR THIS
MEAN HOW BIG OF A STUMBLING
BLOCK IS THE THE BEST ASPECT
OF THIS PIECE OF THESE PIECES
OF EQUIPMENT?
YEAH, IT&apos;S A GOOD QUESTION AND
ONE THAT I PROBABLY DON&apos;T HAVE
ALL THE ANSWERS TO.
BUT BASED ON WHAT I&apos;VE HEARD
FROM OUR FRIENDS OF PUBLIC
WORKS, I THINK THERE&apos;S SEVERAL
CHALLENGES.
THE FIRST IS THERE IS AN ORDER
OF MAGNITUDE COST DIFFERENTIAL
BETWEEN A GASOLINE POWERED
VEHICLE VERSUS AN ELECTRIC
VEHICLE.
MY UNDERSTANDING IS WE COULD
GET A SORT OF LIKE A BOBCAT
STYLE MACHINE THAT COULD WORK
IN A BIKE LANE FOR LESS THAN
ONE THOUSAND.
BUT THE ELECTRIC VERSION IS
LIKE TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY
THOUSAND SOMEWHERE THEREABOUTS
.
THE OTHER THING IS THE SUPPLY
ISSUE IS REAL.
IF WE WERE TO PUT THE ORDER IN
FOR THE ELECTRIC AND THIS IS
THE SWEEPER I BELIEVE I THINK
THEY SAID IT&apos;S FOURTEEN MONTHS
LEAD TIME TO EVEN GET IT
DELIVERED.
&gt;&gt; SO EVEN IF WE PUT IT IN
TODAY IT&apos;S NOT GOING TO BE
AVAILABLE TILL DECEMBER OF NEXT
YEAR.
SO THAT&apos;S A CHALLENGE THEN THE
OTHER THING TOO IS STAFFING
CAPACITY.
SO OUR CURRENT AND PAST
PRACTICES YOU JUST HAVE THE
SINGLE DRIVER OF THE TRUCK, THE
BIG PLOW, THE BIG SWEEPER
THAT&apos;S JUST RUNNING FROM CURB
FACE TO FACE AND THEY&apos;RE JUST
DOING MULTIPLE PASSES NOW YOU
NEED A SEPARATE OPERATOR OF A
SEPARATE VEHICLE SO THAT
PRESENTS A CHALLENGE AND YOU
KNOW THE CITY THERE ARE HIGH
EXPECTATIONS IN TERMS
OF PLOWING OUR ROADWAYS.
IN ADDITION OF PLOWING AND
SWEEPING OUR OUR OUR BIKE LANES
SO PUBLIC WORKS AS WELL WHICH
WHICH SHOULD I DO FIRST?
WHAT AM I SUPPOSED TO DO IF I
ONLY HAVE ONE DRIVER?
DO WE DO THE BIKE LANE FIRST OR
THE ROAD FIRST AND THEN THE
OTHER CHALLENGE WHICH IS KIND
OF UNIQUE BUT WE&apos;LL HAVE TO BE
SOLVED FOR EVENTUALLY IS THE
WHEELER CENTER THAT WE
CURRENTLY WHERE ALL OF OUR
PUBLIC WORKS VEHICLES ARE
PARKED AND OPERATED FROM WHICH
IS DOWN ON US ON SCHOOL AND
ELSWORTH THAT WE DON&apos;T HAVE
CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE DOWN
THERE YET.
NOW EVENTUALLY WE&apos;LL HAVE TO
SOLVE FOR THAT AS WE BRING OUR
FLEET SO THAT WILL EVENTUALLY
GET SOLVED FOR BUT THEN THE
OTHER OPERATIONAL PIECE IS BIG
TRUCKS.
I MEAN WE CAN DUMP OUR SPOILS
INTO BIG DUMP TRUCKS.
SMALL VEHICLES ARE NOT CAPABLE
OF DUMPING INTO BIG DUMP TRUCKS
.
SO THEN WE MAY EVEN NEED TO BUY
A COMPLEMENTARY VEHICLE FOR THE
PLOW OR THE SWEEPER SO THAT
IT&apos;S COMPATIBLE WITH THE
SMALLER FOOTPRINT THAT IT HAS.
SO SO IT&apos;S THIS SORT OF WE&apos;RE
ALL NEW TO THIS.
WE&apos;VE BEEN ASKING WHAT OTHER
COMMUNITIES ARE DOING AND IT&apos;S
EVERY PROBLEM WE SOLVE FOR
SEEMS TO ALSO PUT FORWARD A NEW
CHALLENGE FOR US AS WELL.
AND SO WE&apos;RE TRYING TO
TROUBLESHOOT IT.
WE&apos;RE TRYING TO FIND THE
FUNDING.
WE&apos;RE TRYING TO FIGURE OUT THE
STAFFING BUT IT&apos;S DIFFICULT TO
DO UNDER THE EXISTING SITUATION
THAT WE&apos;RE OPERATING UNDER.
SO DO YOU HAVE A SENSE OF WHAT
WE WHAT WE COULD ASK CITY
COUNCIL TO DO LIKE HOW HOW TO
ELEVATE THIS IN A WAY WHERE
IT&apos;S GOING TO MAKE THINGS
BETTER AS OPPOSED TO WORSE OR
NEUTRAL?
&gt;&gt; YEAH, I THINK INTERNALLY IN
MY DISCUSSIONS WITH THE CHIEF
FINANCIAL OFFICER THE IDEA WAS
TO REALLY PUT FORWARD SOMETHING
TO CITY COUNCILS PART OF THE
BUDGET PROCESS SO THAT THEY
UNDERSTAND WHAT THE TRADE OFFS
ARE BECAUSE YOU KNOW,
UNFORTUNATELY BUDGETING IS A
ZERO SUM GAME, RIGHT?
THERE&apos;S ONLY SO MUCH REVENUE
THAT COMES TO THE CITY AND SO
FOR EVERY NEW THING THAT GETS
ENTERED WE NEED TO OFFSET THAT
WITH SOMETHING ELSE.
AND SO THAT OFFSET IS WHERE
IT&apos;S A POLICY DECISION AND NOT
A STAFF DECISION.
SO YOU KNOW, IF WE BUY THIS WE
OPERATE THIS THING WHAT WHAT
WILL WE HAVE TO FOREGO OR
SCALED BACK TO ACCOMMODATE THAT
AND THAT&apos;S THE PART THAT I
THINK I DON&apos;T HAVE A GOOD
ANSWER FOR.
THIS MIGHT BE A SPACE WHERE
THIS COMMISSION MAY WANT TO
RECOMMEND WHAT THAT TRADE OFF
IS BUT AT THE SAME TIME THERE&apos;S
A WHOLE UNIVERSE OF TRADE OFFS.
RIGHT, THAT I WOULDN&apos;T EXPECT
YOU TO KNOW AND SO I DON&apos;T
KNOW.
SO I THINK IT&apos;S REALLY JUST
A
QUESTION OF MAKING YOUR
INTENTION KNOWN IF YOU SO
CHOOSE WE CAN EITHER INSERT
THAT AS PART OF THE BUDGET
PROCESS AS PART OF THIS
COMMISSION&apos;S RECOMMENDATION
INTO THAT OR IF YOU WANT TO
SEEK A DIFFERENT DIFFERENT
AVENUE WE CAN WE CAN ELEVATED
THROUGH OTHER MEANS AS WELL.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, IF YOU WERE TO
PASS A RESOLUTION JUST A
STANDALONE RESOLUTION, THEN
THAT WOULD MAKE ITS WAY TO
COUNCIL JUST AS A MATTER
OF COURSE THEY WOULD KNOW THAT
YOU&apos;RE TAKING IT SERIOUSLY OR
WANT US TO TAKE IT SERIOUSLY.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THAT&apos;S HELPFUL.
AND I JUST WANT TO SEE THIS IS
THAT RIGHT NOW OK, I WANT TO
TAKE A MINUTE ALSO SINCE WE&apos;VE
BEEN FOCUSING ON THE THE
ORGANIZATION PEACE AROUND
PROTECTED BIKE LANE MAINTENANCE
TO ALSO JUST SEE IF PEOPLE HAVE
QUESTIONS OR THOUGHTS ABOUT
THIS OTHER ISSUE WHICH IS
TRYING TO BUILD INCORPORATE
CALMING LIKE SPEED MANAGEMENT
CALMING NEW BIKE FACILITIES
INTO RESURFACING PROJECTS AS
THE DEFAULT WHETHER PEOPLE HAVE
ANY THOUGHTS OR QUESTIONS ABOUT
THAT BECAUSE I THINK WE&apos;LL
PROBABLY END UP TREATING THESE
AS TWO SEPARATE ITEMS BECAUSE
THEY THINK THEY&apos;RE SEPARATE
ENOUGH.
BUT THEY WERE THE TWO THINGS
THAT I HAVE BEEN TALKING ABOUT
AND THINKING ABOUT FOR A WHILE
.
OK, COOL.
OH JULIE.
&gt;&gt; I MEAN JUST BASED ON HOW
RAYMONDS RAIN ON OUR PARADE
ABOUT THE OTHER PIECE THIS THIS
PART SEEMS MORE TRACTABLE TO ME
AND WE KNOW THAT OUR COUNCIL
REP IS YOU KNOW, SUPPORTS IT SO
IT SEEMS LIKE WE SHOULD
DEFINITELY MOVE FORWARD WITH
THIS ONE AND I DON&apos;T KNOW AS
FAR AS THE FIRST ISSUE I FEEL
LIKE SOMEHOW ATTACHING EQUITY
TO IT MIGHT HELP THAT WE WE
FEEL LIKE THERE&apos;S SOME INEQUITY
IN HOW THE MAINTENANCE
RESOURCES ARE BEING ALLOCATED
AND YOU KNOW, WE URGE COUNCIL
TO TO SEEK OUT WAYS TO MAKE IT
MORE EQUITABLE, SOMETHING ALONG
THOSE LINES MAYBE.
&gt;&gt; I THINK THAT&apos;S A GREAT
POINT.
WE CAN DEFINITELY DO THAT.
SO I THINK WHAT I&apos;LL DO THEN IS
I&apos;LL WORK ON A COUPLE
OF RESOLUTIONS TO BRING TO THE
NEXT MEETING AND WE CAN REFINE
THOSE AS NEEDED AND TALK ABOUT
THEM AND POTENTIALLY VOTE ON
THEM NEXT MONTH.
ANY OTHER THOUGHTS?
&gt;&gt; WHAT ABOUT IT LIKE SNOWPLOW.
&gt;&gt; OH SORRY HELENO SUGGESTS
BIKES.
NO PERHAPS THERE&apos;S LOTS
OF THAT&apos;S THUMBS UP.
&gt;&gt; I DON&apos;T KNOW IF THEY EXIST I
DON&apos;T KNOW BUT I NEED ABOUT IT
IN BETWEEN EVITES SNOWPLOW
THERE IS NO DANGER OF OF BIKERS
WHO CAN STILL BUY WALKER IN.
NO THERE&apos;S NO CHANCE THAT
THEY&apos;RE GOING TO BUY A VEHICLE
CAN BE VERY DANGEROUS.
IT JUST SIMPLY BIKES.
NO I NEED YOU TO STOP NOW
THAT&apos;S GREAT IDEA.
SORRY EVERYONE OK THANKS.
COOL WE&apos;RE GOING TO WRAP THIS
UP MOVING ON.
I THINK THAT&apos;S A WHOLE AGENDA
MOVING ON TO THE THINGS WE DO
EVERY TIME STARTING STAFF
REPORT AND UPDATES.
ALL RIGHT.
I&apos;M LOOKING AT THE WRONG THING
.
THAT&apos;S THE RIGHT THING.
LAST MONTH I SHARED MY SCREEN.
&gt;&gt; WAS THAT HELPFUL OR WAS THAT
DISTRACTING?
&gt;&gt; I THINK IT WAS HELPFUL.
OK FOR ME I&apos;M GOING TO SEE MY
HIGHLIGHTS AND ONCE YOU SEE
THOSE I&apos;M PRETTY WORTHLESS.
BUT BUT I&apos;LL I&apos;LL SHARE SCREEN
ANYWAY SO YOU CAN FOLLOW ALONG
WITH WHAT IT IS I AM SAYING AND
IT SHOULD BE IN THIS.
ALL RIGHT.
SO SO CHURCH THE BIG THING HERE
IS CHANGE IN SCHEDULE BIDS CAME
BACK HI.
EVEN THE LOW BID WAS MUCH
HIGHER THAN ANTICIPATED SO IT
LOOKS LIKE IT&apos;S GOING TO BE
DELAYED TO SPRING OF TWENTY
TWENTY THREE SIDEWALK GAPS.
SOME NEW UPDATES ON SCHEDULE.
SO ELSWORTH FROM ON THE NORTH
SIDE FROM STATE TO SCHOOL
SCHEDULED TO START LATER THIS
MONTH.
HISCOCK IS UNDER CONSTRUCTION.
THIS IS NEAR SUMMIT NEXEN
TRAVER FROM WESTBURY TO LOGAN
ELEMENTARY IS NOW COMPLETE.
SO CHURCH ON THE NORTH SIDE
FROM LANDMARK TO WINSTEAD AND
GREENVIEW TO SEVEN IS IT
SCHEDULE CHANGE THIS NOW SPRING
OF TWENTY TWENTY THREE
TUEBINGEN FROM LANCASHIRE TO
TRAMER IS UNDER CONSTRUCTION.
WINCHELL BROCKMANN FREEZE LOOP
IS CURRENTLY UNDER CONSTRUCTION
AS WELL.
STATE STREET IMPROVEMENT
PROJECT SORRY.
YES IF IF I MAY SUPPLY SOME
UPDATED INFORMATION FROM WHAT
WAS THERE SINCE WE DO THIS A
WEEK OR SO IN ADVANCE OR MORE
THE THE HISCOX SIDEWALK IS
UNDER CONSTRUCTION YET THEY
HAVEN&apos;T STARTED ON THAT WORK
OUT THERE AGAIN DUE TO SUPPLY
CHAIN ISSUES.
THAT&apos;S AN ASSOCIATION WITH A
STAUSS OR A PROJECT.
THEY COULDN&apos;T GET ALL OF THE
PIPE THAT THEY NEEDED SO THAT
THIS HAS NOT STARTED.
THANK YOU, NICK.
ALL RIGHT.
STATE STREET IMPROVEMENT THIS
IS JUST AN UPDATED SCHEDULE
THAT IS PHASE ONE IS RUNNING A
LITTLE BEHIND BUT IT&apos;S
ANTICIPATED TO BE COMPLETED IN
OCTOBER PLOT ROAD WE DO HAVE A
MEETING TENTATIVELY SCHEDULED
FOR OCTOBER TWENTY SIX FOR
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT ON THAT WILL
BE SURE TO SHARE THAT WITH YOU
ONCE THAT BECOMES AVAILABLE.
THIS IS THAT ROAD BETWEEN HERE.
SHARON PAQUIN PACARD BARTON
DRIVE BIKE LANES WILL BE
INSTALLED THIS YEAR BROADWAY
STREET.
THERE IS A PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
MEETING COMING UP A WEEK FROM
TODAY AT SIX PM.
I DON&apos;T KNOW IF I&apos;VE SHARED
THOSE DETAILS WITH YOU BUT YOU
CAN GO TO THE PROJECT WEBSITE
WHICH IS A TWO GURGLED BROADWAY
FOR MORE DETAILS THERE FROM
PARKWAY TUEBINGEN RESURFACING
IS CURRENTLY UNDERWAY GATTI&apos;S
AVENUE RESURFACING FROM
OBSERVATORY TO HIGHLAND WAS
POSTPONED TO SPRING OF TWENTY
TWENTY THREE MILLER CATHERINE
IS PROJECT IF YOU HAVEN&apos;T BEEN
OUT THERE THEY ARE CURRENTLY
WORKING OUT THERE.
CONSTRUCTION BEGAN ABOUT A
MONTH AGO LET&apos;S SEE MOVING ON
TO DESIGN AND PLANNING EARHART
ROAD WILL HAVE A PUBLIC MEETING
TENTATIVELY SCHEDULED FOR
OCTOBER 20TH.
TWENTY TWENTY TWO SO THAT WILL
BE COMING UP IN ABOUT A MONTH&apos;S
TIME AND AGAIN WILL BE SURE TO
SHARE INFORMATION WITH YOU ON
THAT AS THAT DATE APPROACHES
TYPICALLY JUST DENHA WE WILL
SEND OUT NOTICES ABOUT TWO
WEEKS BEFORE THE MEETING.
SO THAT&apos;S WHEN THEY&apos;LL START
SEEING SOME OF THESE SHARING
EMAILS AND THINGS OF THAT
NATURE.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
YOU GOT AN UPDATE TODAY ON 7TH
AND GREENVIEW SO WE DON&apos;T NEED
TO GO INTO ANY DETAIL ON THAT
BROOK STREET YET ANOTHER PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT THAT&apos;S HAPPENING
TOMORROW NIGHT AT 7:00 PM IS
LARGELY WATER MAIN PROJECT BUT
THEN THERE&apos;S SOME STREET
RESURFACING, SOME SIDEWALK GAP
FILLING AND POSSIBLY A
RECONFIGURATION IN AT BROOKS
BUSPAR IN SUNSET.
ALL RIGHT.
STATE AND HILL, THE BIG UPDATE
HERE IS THERE IS ANOTHER PUBLIC
MEETING SCHEDULED FOR SEPTEMBER
TWENTY SEVEN AT SEVEN PM SO
THAT&apos;S JUST UNDER A WEEK AWAY.
SO I KNOW SOME OF YOU&apos;VE BEEN
FOLLOWING THAT PROJECT PRETTY
CLOSELY.
YOU MIGHT WANT TO TUNE INTO
THAT MEETING ERM NOT
COORDINATION.
&gt;&gt; THERE&apos;S CURRENTLY A ROUND
OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT THAT&apos;S
OPEN FOR THE ERM FOURTEEN
BARTON INTERCHANGE STUDY I
THINK I HOSTED OR PASTED IN THE
EMAIL ANNOUNCING THE PACKET THE
ANNOUNCEMENT FROM ERM SO IF YOU
HAD A CHANCE TO VISIT THAT
WEBSITE YOU&apos;LL SEE THAT THEY&apos;RE
CURRENTLY CONTEMPLATING FOR
DESIGN ALTERNATIVES.
ONE IS A NO BILL WHICH IS JUST
KIND OF THE BASELINE AGAINST
WHICH YOU ASSESS ALL THE OTHER.
THE NEXT IS TO CLOSE THE
EASTBOUND RAMP SO IF YOU&apos;RE
GOING NORTH ON BARTON YOU
WOULDN&apos;T BE ABLE TO GET ONTO
N14 FROM THERE.
THE OTHER IS A MODIFIED LOOP
WHICH WOULD TAKE IT TO MORE
CONTEMPORARY FREEWAY
INTERCHANGE.
SO INSTEAD OF THAT STOP SIGN
CONDITION THAT YOU CURRENTLY
EXPERIENCE FROM BARTON AND
FOURTEEN, THIS WOULD KIND
OF EXTEND THAT RAMP TURNED INTO
A YIELD SIMILAR TO WHAT YOU
WOULD EXPECT ON A FREEWAY
INTERCHANGE AND THEN THEIR LAST
CONCEPT IS A DOGBONE WHICH IS A
SERIES OF ROUNDABOUTS.
SO THEY LIKEN IT TO WHAT YOU
EXPERIENCE AT MAPLE AND
FOURTEEN BY SKYLINE HIGH SCHOOL
OR OVER ON GETTYS AND TWENTY
THREE BY CONCORDIA THAT YOU&apos;D
HAVE A ROUNDABOUT ON EACH SIDE
OF THE INTERSTATE AND THEN
THERE&apos;S ACTUALLY EVEN A THIRD
ROUNDABOUT FURTHER TO THE NORTH
FOR THE EASTBOUND GETTING OFF
RAMP.
SO SERIES OF ROUNDABOUTS IS
OPTION FOUR.
SO IF YOU HAVE STRONG FEELINGS
ABOUT ANY OF THAT, I DO
ENCOURAGE YOU TO GO ON TO THE
WEBSITE AND PROVIDE COMMENTS ON
THEM HIGHWAY SAFETY IMPROVEMENT
AWARDS THIS JUST CAME THROUGH
LAST WEEK.
WE&apos;RE PRETTY EXCITED ABOUT IT.
WE GOT THREE GRANTS SIGNAL
BACKPLATE.
SO IF YOU&apos;RE NOT FAMILIAR WITH
THIS CONCEPT, THIS IS WHERE YOU
PUT SORT OF BLACK PLATE BEHIND
A TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
IT HELPS WITH THE VISIBILITY
ESPECIALLY AT DAWN AND DUSK AND
BRINGS IT MAKES SIGNALS MORE
VISIBLE TO THE MOTORING PUBLIC
.
IT&apos;S A PROVEN COUNTERMEASURE
PROVEN
SAFETY COUNTERMEASURE
WITH THE FEDS.
SO THAT&apos;S WHY AM LIKES TO FUND
IT.
BUT THEN WE ALSO GOT SOME NON
MOTORIZED STUFF COME DOWN.
PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS ARE VERY
SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS FOR
ROUGHLY ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHT
THOUSAND FEDERAL AH ONE HUNDRED
EIGHT THOUSAND DOLLARS AND THEN
A SERIES OF UPGRADES TO MILLER
CROSSWALKS TO INSTALL
RECTANGULAR RAPID FLASHING
BEACONS.
SO FORMER HACKER CRESCENT BRUCE
PION WELL GET UPGRADED SIGNAGE
OUT THERE.
SO THAT&apos;S AN EXCITING PROJECT
THAT WAS ACTUALLY EVEN IF YOU
WERE PAYING ATTENTION TO THE
VISION ZERO IMPLEMENTATION
COMMITTEE THAT WERE SOME OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT WERE MADE
THERE.
SO WE JUST GOT FUNDING TO BE
ABLE TO IMPLEMENT THOSE.
THOSE ARE TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
PROJECTS THOUGH AND I DON&apos;T
THINK THE STATES BUT THIS WOULD
BE FEDERAL FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR SO IT&apos;S A ALMOST
TWO YEARS OUT FROM WHERE WE ARE
TODAY.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
STREET LIGHTS JUST THE USUAL
UPDATE.
EIGHT HUNDRED SEVENTY SEVEN
STREET LIGHTS HAVE BEEN
ADDRESSED BY DC OUTAGES TO
DATE.
WE DID HAVE A BATCH OF NEW
STREETLIGHTS GET INSTALLED AT
MILLER AND BROOKS MILLER
PINETREE MILLER AT BRUCE S
FOREST AT WILLARD DEPOT AT
NORTH DEFUNIAK AT BOEING W
LIBERTY AND FOURTH AND MURRAY
FLETCHER NORTH OF NORTH YOU AND
ALONG SIDE CHURCH AND SKY ALE.
WE ALREADY TALKED ABOUT THE
VISION ZERO IMPLEMENTATION
COMMITTEE SO WE&apos;RE WORKING ON
THE ENGAGEMENT SCHEDULE AS I
MENTIONED OR THE SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
SO STAY TUNED FOR THAT.
I ALLUDED TO THIS EARLIER.
WE DID SUBMIT THE SAFE STREETS
AND ROADS FOR ALL GRANTS AFTER
CITY COUNCIL APPROVED SUBMITTAL
AT THEIR FIRST MEETING IN
SEPTEMBER.
THE DEADLINE WAS SEPTEMBER 15TH
.
WE SUBMITTED ON SEPTEMBER 14TH
SO WE DID GET IT IN BY THE
DEADLINE AND NO FATAL FLAWS
WERE IDENTIFIED WHICH ALWAYS
WAS A BREATH OF RELIEF THERE
PACKARD ROAD SPEED LIMITS
THERE&apos;S A DETAILED MEMO
INCLUDED IN YOUR PACKET THAT I
WON&apos;T GO OVER BUT WE ARE GOING
TO REDUCE THE POSTED SPEED
LIMIT ON PACARD BETWEEN
BEARPARK OR EASY STREET AND THE
CITY LIMITS TO THE E AT US
TWENTY THREE CURRENTLY THAT
SECTION IS POSTED AT FORTY
MILES PER HOUR BUT WHEN WE PUT
IN THE BIKE LANE NARROWED THE
LANES WE ACTUALLY SAW THAT
SPEEDS DROPPED WHICH IS WHAT WE
WOULD EXPECT WHICH NOW MEANS
THE FIFTIETH PERCENTILE HAS
DROPPED WHICH ALLOWS US UNDER
MICHIGAN CODE TO BE ABLE TO
DROP THE SPEED LIMIT SO IT JUST
GOES TO SHOW THAT LANE
NARROWING DOES WORK WHEN YOU
HAVE THOSE LANES AND SO WE&apos;RE
ABLE TO KIND OF KIND
OF INSTITUTIONALIZE THAT NOW
AND MAKE IT OFFICIAL AND THEN
JUST SOME UPDATES ON SOME
OF THE ENCOURAGEMENT AND
EDUCATION THAT WE&apos;VE BEEN
DOING.
I THINK WE&apos;VE REPORTED IN PAST
THAT WE HAD SOME BADGES THROUGH
THE LIBRARY SUMMER GAME THAT IS
NOW CLOSED BUT THE TOTAL
NUMBERS FOR WALKING AND BIKING
TOTALED OVER THIRTEEN HUNDRED
PARTICIPANTS, WHICH IS PRETTY
EXCITING FOR US BECAUSE IT&apos;S
THE FIRST TIME WE&apos;VE DONE THAT
AGAIN OF SHOUT OUT TO SUZANNE
FLOWERS, OUR NEW TRANSPORTATION
PLANNER WHO HELPED ORGANIZE
THAT WITH CYNTHIA AND SHOUT OUT
TO THE LIBRARY FOR ALLOWING TO
PARTICIPATE AS WELL AND THEN
THE GOLD LEVEL RIDE WHICH
HAPPENED THE DAY AFTER YOUR
LAST MEETING WE HAD ROUGHLY
TWENTY FIVE PARTICIPANTS.
WE HAVE REPRESENTATIVES FROM
THE POLICE HELPING AT SMITH
GROUP AND WE THANK ALL THOSE
THAT SHOWED UP INCLUDING SOME
OF YOU ON THIS CALL.
AND THEN WE&apos;RE ALSO WORKING
WITH OUR COMMUNICATIONS
DEPARTMENT TO PUSH OUT SOME
SAFETY MESSAGING ESPECIALLY
RELATED TO SCHOOL SAFETY AND
THAT CONCLUDES MY SUMMARY AND
I&apos;M HAPPY TO TAKE ANY QUESTIONS
OR COMMENTS FROM THANK YOU,
JULIE.
&gt;&gt; SO I&apos;M RAYMOND.
IN A WRITTEN PUBLIC COMMENT
THERE WAS THIS LONG EMAIL CHAIN
ABOUT ASKING FOR A NEW
CROSSWALK TO BE PUT IN ON
GATTI&apos;S AND I JUST WONDERED IN
DELAYED WORK ON GETTING IS THAT
PART OF THE PLAN TO PUT THE
CROSSWALK WHERE THEY&apos;RE ASKING
FOR IT?
YEAH, NICK, I CAN&apos;T RECALL I
KNOW THERE ARE SOME CROSSWALK
IMPROVEMENTS AS PART OF THE
GATTI&apos;S PROJECT.
I CAN&apos;T RECALL IF WHAT WAS
INCLUDED IN THE PUBLIC COMMENT
ARE THE EXACT LOCATIONS I I
KNOW THEY WERE LOOKED AT AS
PART OF THAT PROJECT BUT I
CAN&apos;T REMEMBER IF THERE WAS A
DESIGN CHALLENGE AS TO WHY WE
COULD OR COULDN&apos;T PUT THEM
THERE.
BUT I I CAN&apos;T I&apos;D HAVE TO
FOLLOW UP AND GET BACK TO YOU
ON THAT JULIE UNLESS NICK KNOWS
OTHERWISE I DON&apos;T HAVE EXACT
INFORMATION BUT I KNOW THE
CROSSWALK LOCATIONS WERE LOOKED
AT VERY CLOSELY BECAUSE THE
GEOMETRY OUT THERE WAS SOME
LIMITATIONS OF WHERE THE
CROSSWALKS COULD GO.
SO WE ARE ADDING CROSSWALKS AS
PART OF THAT PROJECT AND WE&apos;RE
PUTTING THEM IN PLACES WHERE
OUR ENGINEERS FEEL THAT THEY
WILL BE SAFE.
&gt;&gt; SO THANK YOU PETE.
&gt;&gt; SO AT THE BEGINNING OF THE
DOCUMENT YOU SAID THAT EVEN
NEXT YEAR IN A SINGLE SEASON
THE RESEARCH PROJECT IS
EXPECTED TO COST MORE THAN IS
BUDGETED.
I&apos;M JUST WONDERING WHAT THE
IMPLICATIONS OF THAT ARE.
IF IT IF IT DOES COST MORE THAN
IS BUDGETED THEN WE WILL GO THE
THE PROJECT WILL BE GOING
FORWARD.
WE REBUILT IT BECAUSE WE THE
WAY WE HAD IT LAID OUT RIGHT
NOW MOST RECENTLY WAS THAT WE
WERE GOING TO DO SOME WORK THIS
FALL AND THEN COMPLETE THE WORK
IN THE SPRING.
WE THINK THAT THERE ARE SOME
EFFICIENCIES THAT CAN BE GAINED
AND THE PRICE WILL GO DOWN A
LITTLE BIT IF WE BRING IT OUT
OR WORK TO BE DONE JUST IN
TWENTY TWENTY THREE.
SO STARTING VERY EARLY IN
TWENTY TWENTY THREE IT WILL
STILL BE HIGHER I GUARANTEE
WILL BE HIGHER THAN WHAT IS
CURRENTLY BUDGETED.
WHAT THAT MEANS IS THAT IT&apos;S
STILL GOING TO GO FORWARD.
WE IF IT DOESN&apos;T GO FORWARD WE
LOSE THE FEDERAL AID THAT WE
HAVE FOR THAT.
WE DON&apos;T WANT TO DO THAT.
SO OTHER THINGS SOMEWHERE ELSE
DOWN THE ROAD WE&apos;LL HAVE
FIGURATIVELY SPEAKING WOULD
HAVE TO GET PUSHED IN ORDER TO
ACCOMMODATE FOR THE BUDGET
OVERAGE ON THAT.
SO AND THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S THE ISSUE
THAT WE&apos;RE LOOKING AT ACROSS
THE BOARD BECAUSE EVERYTHING IS
COMING IN MORE EXPENSIVE THAN
IT WAS JUST A YEAR
SUBSTANTIALLY MORE EXPENSIVE
THAN IT WAS A YEAR AGO.
OK, THANKS.
OK, THANK YOU.
RAMAN&apos;S NEXT UP WE HAVE LIAISON
REPORTS SO ANY COMMISSIONERS
WHO SPECIFICALLY SERVE AS A
LIAISON TO ANOTHER BODY OR
ORGANIZATION ARE INVITED TO
PROVIDE BRIEF REPORTS AND
UPDATES
.
OK, NEXT UP IS COMMISSION
MEMBER COMMUNICATION.
SO THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
ANY COMMISSIONER TO PROVIDE
REPORTS OR UPDATES
.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;RE CLOSING OUT STRONG SO
THE NEXT STEP IS CALL FOR
AGENDA ITEMS.
AND I&apos;M JUST GOING TO SAY
BECAUSE WE HAVE SO MANY FOLKS
THAT ANYONE CAN REQUEST AN
AGENDA ITEM LIKE IF THERE&apos;S A
THING ABOUT HOW THE
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM WORKS
THAT YOU ARE CURIOUS ABOUT, I
WOULD LIKE TO LEARN MORE FROM
STAFF OR THERE IS SOMETHING
THAT IS A PATTERN THAT YOU FEEL
LIKE WE SHOULD BE ADDRESSING IN
SOME WAY LIKE ANYONE CAN BRING
FORWARD AN AGENDA ITEM.
IT MIGHT NOT HAPPEN AT THE NEXT
MEETING BUT YOU CAN THINK ABOUT
IT NOW.
YOU CAN THINK ABOUT IT LATER.
YOU JUST UNMUTED I&apos;VE ANYTHING
TO ADD.
OK, SO AND OF COURSE YOU DON&apos;T
HAVE TO PUT THE FORWARD RIGHT
NOW YOU CAN EMAIL ME AND
RAYMONDE AT ANY TIME AND WE
WILL FIGURE OUT A WAY TO
ADDRESS THESE ITEMS.
OK, I&apos;M MOLLY.
IF I IF I MAY I CAN JUST GIVE
YOU A SNEAK PEEK AT WHAT WE
MIGHT EXPECT NEXT MONTH.
SO AS ALWAYS, IF THERE&apos;S NEW
INFORMATION COMING OUT OF THE
VISION ZERO IMPLEMENTATION
COMMITTEE OR JUST THAT
INITIATIVE, WE&apos;LL BE SURE TO
SHARE THAT WITH YOU.
I SUSPECT THE BIG PUSH WILL BE
AFTER THE NEXT ROUND
OF ENGAGEMENT BUT WE&apos;RE STILL
WORKING ON DAY TO DAY SO WE ARE
EXPECTING THE CRASH REPORT
PROBABLY IN OCTOBER .
SO I&apos;M HOPEFUL WE CAN WORKING
TOWARDS A NEW DASHBOARD THAT
HOPEFULLY WILL BE NICE AND
SLICK THAT WE CAN SHOWCASE FOR
YOU THE FLAT ROAD
RECONFIGURATION AGAIN THAT
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENTS COMING UP.
SO WE SUSPECT WE&apos;RE GOING TO
COME BACK TO THE TRANSPORTATION
END SOON, MAYBE AS EARLY AS
NEXT MONTH.
STAYTON HILL IS DEFINITELY
COMING BACK NEXT MONTH BECAUSE
OF THE PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT THAT&apos;S
COMING UP NEXT WEEK.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;LL HAVE KIND OF SOME
CLEAR DIRECTION IN TERMS
OF WHAT OUR NEXT STEPS ARE THEN
WE&apos;VE ALSO ASKED THE WASHTENAW
AREA TRANSPORTATION STUDY OR
LOTS TO COME TO US AND TALK
ABOUT HOW FEDERAL FUNDING
WORKS.
YOU JUST HEARD FROM NICK THAT
CYO HAS FEDERAL AID ON IT.
SO HOW DOES THAT FEDERAL MONEY
GET PROGRAMS THAT GOES THROUGH
LOTS AND SO THEY CAN KIND
OF GIVE AN OVERVIEW OF WHAT
FEDERAL FUNDS ARE OUT THERE,
WHAT THEY CAN BE USED FOR AND
HOW THOSE ARE PRIORITIZED.
&gt;&gt; AND THEN I THINK WE HAVE A
COUPLE OF ITEMS FROM THIS
MEETING WHICH INCLUDE THE
DISCUSSION ABOUT THE
MAINTENANCE OF THE PROTECTED
ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION
FACILITIES AND THEN I HAVE A
COUPLE OF FOLLOW UPS THAT I
WILL PROBABLY FOLLOW UP WITH
SOME OF YOU INDIVIDUALLY WITH
QUESTIONS THAT I COULD ANSWER
TO THANK YOU AND SO LET&apos;S SEE
OUR NEXT MEETING IS SCHEDULED
FOR WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 19TH AT
SEVEN P.M. IT WILL ALSO BE A
VIRTUAL MEETING SO THERE ARE NO
OBJECTIONS.
WE&apos;LL ADJOURN TONIGHT&apos;S
MEETING.
ALL RIGHT.
MEETING ADJOURNED.
&gt;&gt; THANKS EVERYONE.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.
I THINK YOU